Research	  paper	  reading	  questions	  
	  
Try	   to	   answer	   the	   following	   questions	   as	   you	   read	   a	   paper.	   Please	   see	   the	  
original	   source	   [1]	   for	   a	   complete	   explanation.	   An	   effective	   method	   to	   read	   a	  
research	  paper	  is	  described	  in	  [2].	  
	  
• What	  is	  your	  take-­‐away	  message	  from	  this	  paper?	  	  
	  
• What	   is	   the	   motivation	   for	   this	   work	   (both	   people	   problem	   and	   technical	  
       problem),	   and	   its	   distillation	   into	   a	   research	   question?	   Why	   doesn’t	   the	  
       people	  problem	  have	  a	  trivial	  solution?	  What	  are	  the	  previous	  solutions	  and	  
       why	  are	  they	  inadequate?	  	  
	  
• What	  is	  the	  proposed	  solution	  (hypothesis,	  idea,	  design)?	  Why	  is	  it	  believed	  it	  
       will	   work?	   How	   does	   it	   represent	   an	   improvement?	   How	   is	   the	   solution	  
       achieved?	  
	  
• What	   is	   the	   author’s	   evaluation	   of	   the	   solution?	   What	   logic,	   argument,	  
       evidence,	   artifacts	   (e.g.,	   a	   proof-­‐of-­‐concept	   system),	   or	   experiments	   are	  
       presented	  in	  support	  of	  the	  idea?	  	  
	  
• What	   is	   your	   analysis	   of	   the	   identified	   problem,	   idea	   and	   evaluation?	   Is	   this	   a	  
       good	   idea?	   What	   flaws	   do	   you	   perceive	   in	   the	   work?	   What	   are	   the	   most	  
       interesting	   or	   controversial	   ideas?	   For	   work	   that	   has	   practical	   implications,	  
       ask	  whether	  this	  will	  work,	  who	  would	  want	  it,	  what	  it	  will	  take	  to	  give	  it	  to	  
       them,	  and	  when	  might	  it	  become	  a	  reality?	  	  
	  
• What	   are	   the	   paper’s	   contributions	   (author’s	   and	   your	   opinion)?	   Ideas,	  
       methods,	  software,	  experimental	  results,	  experimental	  techniques...?	  	  
	  
• What	   are	   future	   directions	   for	   this	   research	   (author’s	   and	   yours,	   perhaps	  
       driven	  by	  shortcomings	  or	  other	  critiques)?	  	  
	  
• What	  questions	  are	  you	  left	  with?	  What	  questions	  would	  you	  like	  to	  raise	  in	  
       an	  open	  discussion	  of	  the	  work	  (review	  interesting	  and	  controversial	  points,	  
       above)?	  What	  do	  you	  find	  difficult	  to	  understand?	  List	  as	  many	  as	  you	  can.	  
	  
	  
[1]	  William	  G.	  Griswold,	  “How	  to	  Read	  an	  Engineering	  Research	  Paper”.	  Online:	  
http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~wgg/CSE210/howtoread.html	  
[2]	  S.	  Keshav,	  “How	  to	  Read	  a	  Paper”.	  Online:	  
http://ccr.sigcomm.org/online/files/p83-­‐keshavA.pdf	  
	  
