

--- PAGE 1 ---
An Empirical Evaluation of the Energy
and Performance Overhead of Monitoring
Tools on Docker-Based Systems
Madalina Dinga1, Ivano Malavolta1
, Luca Giamattei2(B)
,
Antonio Guerriero2
, and Roberto Pietrantuono2
1 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
m.dinga@student.vu.nl, i.malavolta@vu.nl
2 University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
{luca.giamattei,antonio.guerriero,roberto.pietrantuono}@unina.it
Abstract. Context. Energy eﬃciency is gaining importance in the
design of software systems, but is still marginally addressed in the area of
microservice-based systems. Energy-related aspects often get neglected
in favor of other software quality attributes, such as performance, service
composition, maintainability, and security.
Goal. The aim of this study is to identify, synthesize and empiri-
cally evaluate the energy and performance overhead of monitoring tools
employed in the microservices and DevOps context.
Method. We selected four representative monitoring tools in the
microservices and DevOps context. These were evaluated via a controlled
experiment on an open-source Docker-based microservice benchmark
system.
Results. The results highlight: i) the speciﬁc frequency and workload
conditions under which energy consumption and performance metrics
are impacted by the tools; ii) the diﬀerences between the tools; iii) the
relation between energy and performance overhead.
1
Introduction
In recent years, the motivation to reduce energy consumption by conservation
and eﬃcient use has grown signiﬁcantly. It has become not only a means for
gaining control over costs but, most importantly, a way of reducing the carbon
footprint of economic and human activity. This is reﬂected across all industries,
including software development [16]. Nevertheless, energy consumption has only
recently come to attention in literature [5]. With the advent of microservice-
based systems coupled with agile (speciﬁcally DevOps) practices, a great focus
is put on continuous monitoring: teams need feedback from the system run-
ning in the ﬁeld, in order to get measures about systems performance, secu-
rity, reliability, to track the status of microservices, to timely detect issues,
and act consequently. However, this requires the deployment and operation of
(sometimes complex) monitoring tools running alongside the microservices,
which in turn might contribute to the overall energy consumed by the system.
c
⃝The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
F. Monti et al. (Eds.): ICSOC 2023, LNCS 14419, pp. 181–196, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-48421-6_13



--- PAGE 2 ---
182
M. Dinga et al.
This study aims to raise awareness on this matter by assessing the impact
on energy consumption and performance overhead of monitoring tools employed
in microservice-based systems. We limit the scope to systems running in Docker
containers since energy is highly dependent on the platform. This helps to sepa-
rate its eﬀect from the main factor (i.e., the tools). Docker was chosen because
it is one of the most popular container-based virtualization solutions [11].
To achieve our goal, we answer the following research questions. RQ1: What
is the impact of using diﬀerent monitoring tools on energy eﬃciency of Docker-
based systems? RQ2: What is the impact of using diﬀerent monitoring tools on
performance of Docker-based systems?
We set up an extensive empirical study in which we select 4 monitoring tools
run alongside a Docker-based system, and we measure energy consumption at
machine level and several performance indicators (CPU, RAM, network, execu-
tion time). We then statistically analyze the results to understand the impact of
the monitoring tools on both aspects under diﬀerent conditions.
The contribution and results of this study are relevant to i) Docker-based
systems developers, as they oﬀer a better understanding on how to integrate
monitoring tools within their applications in an energy-eﬃcient manner; ii) the
tools’ maintainers, as they highlighting the impact of their monitoring systems
on energy and performance, and showing potential improvements; iii) researchers
working on microservices and DevOps, as they push toward addressing the prob-
lem of an eﬃcient monitoring that has to trade oﬀenergy consumption for the
need of gathering as much relevant information as possible to ensure quality.
The full replication package of the study is available at https://github.com/
S2-group/icsoc-2023-energy-perf-monitoring-docker-rep-pkg.
2
Background
As deﬁned by Fowler and Lewis, the microservices architectural style is “an app-
roach for developing a single application as a suite of small services, each run-
ning in its own process and communicating with lightweight mechanisms, often
an HTTP resource API” [1]. Docker [11] is one of the most recurrent technolo-
gies for implementing microservices [4]. It is a lightweight virtualization platform
for packaging software solutions into self-contained and independently-deployed
units (i.e., containers). Among others, with Docker, teams can develop and deploy
their (loosely-coupled) microservices independently from each other, make faster
and more frequent releases, and test their microservices in autononomy.
Being inherently distributed, microservice-based systems require specialized
monitoring tools, such as Netdata1, Prometheus2, etc. Without losing gener-
ality, a monitoring tool is typically composed of one or more DBs for storing
the collected metrics (e.g., the Time Series Database in Prometheus), a dash-
boarding platform for querying the DBs and/or showing the collected metrics to
the user (e.g., Grafana), an alerting subsystem for sending notiﬁcations to the
1 https://www.netadata.cloud.
2 https://prometheus.io.



--- PAGE 3 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
183
user (e.g., the rule-based Alert Manager component in Prometheus), and a set
of monitoring components (e.g., Prometheus exporters) – typically one for
each microservice – that collect metrics about their associated microservice (e.g.,
average CPU usage) and make those metrics available to the DBs. Despite their
undoubted usefulness for the observability of the system, the just-mentioned
monitoring components do not contribute directly to the functionalities of the
system; still, they are deployed together with the microservices being monitored
and compete for the same hardware resources. In this study, we are interested in
quantifying the overhead that the just-mentioned monitoring components pro-
duce in terms of performance and energy consumption of the monitored system.
The collection of performance-related measures (e.g., CPU load, memory
utilization, network requests) is relatively straightforward for Docker-based sys-
tems, primarily thanks to already-existing monitoring components wrapping
Linux utilities such as SAR3. Diﬀerently, the measurement of power con-
sumption (and thus energy) requires extra eﬀort and technical skills. Some
well-known tools for monitoring energy are PowerPack (physical measurement),
RAPL (software-based measurement), or PowerAPI (software library). In this
study, we favour accuracy and measure the power consumption at machine-level
using a well-known physical power meter called Watts Up Pro [8].
3
Related Work
To our knowledge, there is no comprehensive study about the energy consump-
tion of monitoring tools in the context of microservices.
Heward et al. [7] look into the performance impact of service monitoring for
web applications. They explore various architecture designs for monitoring the
web traﬃc. One conclusion is that a colocated proxy used for monitoring is much
more eﬃcient than a proxy located on a diﬀerent machine. Similar to our study,
this paper assesses the impact of monitoring tools, however it does not consider
their impact on energy eﬃciency.
Foutse et al. [9] assess the impact of cloud patterns on performance and
energy consumption and provide a series of guidelines for implementing energy-
eﬃcient cloud-based applications. Their results focus around the environmental
impact of microservice-based systems, showing that migration to a microservices
architecture can improve performance, while reducing energy consumption. The
study does not take into account monitoring.
A related study [10] investigates the use of SmartNIC’s, a low-power pro-
cessor, for improving server energy-eﬃciency without latency loss, in the con-
text of microservices. They propose E1, an execution platform for SmartNIC-
accelerated servers, which, according to the authors, can signiﬁcantly improve
cluster energy-eﬃciency up to 3×, with minimal latency cost, for com-
mon microservices. The paper focuses on improving the energy eﬃciency of
microservice-based systems, however it does not take into account the poten-
tial overhead of monitoring tools.
3 https://linux.die.net/man/1/sar.



--- PAGE 4 ---
184
M. Dinga et al.
Santos et al. [14] compare the energy consumption of applications running in
Docker containers to those running bare-metal. The authors demonstrate that
Docker increases the energy consumption even if the system under test is idle.
The eﬀect is caused by the activity of the Docker daemon (dockerd), a service
that permanently runs on the host and orchestrates the containers. While this
paper focuses on the energy footprint of Docker, our study explores how various
monitoring tools running alongside Docker-based systems impact energy.
4
Study Design
4.1
Experimental Subjects: Monitoring Tools
Tools Selection. We searched for open-source monitoring tools on GitHub,
looking at the ones reporting DevOps as topics in their description. The tools
have been selected according to the following requirements:
– Compatible with microservices applications running in Docker containers.
– Do not require integration at the application level (i.e. code instrumentation),
and in general aiming to:
• avoid introducing unnecessary confounding variables, such as communi-
cation overhead due to interaction between additional components,
• avoid increasing the deployment of the integrated applications,
• aid replication of the experiments.
– Capable to collect metrics at container level.
Table 1. Monitoring tools
Monitoring Tool
ELK Stack
Website
https://www.elastic.co/elastic-stack/
Github
https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch
First and last release*
2/8/2010 and 07/29/2022
Stars on Github*
60,700
Netdata
Website
https://www.netdata.cloud/
Github
https://github.com/netdata/netdata
First and last release*
9/26/2015 and 08/11/2022
Stars on Github*
60,300
Prometheus
Website
https://prometheus.io/
Github
https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus
First and last release*
2/25/2015 and 08/13/2022
Stars on Github*
43,800
Zipkin
Website
https://zipkin.io/
Github
https://github.com/openzipkin/zipkin
First and last release*
6/3/2016 and 1/27/2022
Stars on Github*
15,600
*The date of access for the most recent release and for the number of stars on Github is
8/15/2022.



--- PAGE 5 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
185
With these requirements, we aim to aid the replicability of the experiments
and facilitate the interpretation of the results avoiding biases. Then, we ranked
the tools in terms of stars and selected the top four, reported in Table 1. Specif-
ically, the ranking included three metric-based tools (ELK Stack, Netdata, and
Prometheus) and one tracing-based tool (Zipkin).
Benchmark System. As part of the setup, we select a well-known Docker-
based microservice application, TrainTicket4 (TTS) [17], and integrated it with
the monitoring tools. TTS is a medium-size benchmark system containing 24
microservices related to business logic, out of 41 in total, implemented in diﬀerent
languages. It has been previously used in several experimental studies and is
representative for industrial multi-container Docker applications through to its
size, granularity, and variety of microservices [3].
Integration. The integration of TTS with the monitoring tools follows the most
basic conﬁguration and deployment described in the documentation of the tools.
ELK stack is integrated using Metricbeat5, a lightweight shipper for host and
service metrics. Metricbeat is deployed directly on the host and it monitors all
of the deployed Docker containers. Metrics are stored in Elasticsearch and can
be visualised in Kibana - both running in separate Docker containers. Frequency
is the time interval (in seconds) at which metrics are sent to the Elasticsearch
cluster. A snapshot of Metricbeat metrics is generated every second for high
level, 5 s for medium level and 10 s for low level.
Netdata, similar to Metricbeat, has an agent that discovers all available con-
trol groups (cgroups) on the host system and collects their metrics. The collection
frequency has the same progression as for ELK stack (1/5/10 s).
Prometheus is integrated with cAdvisor (Container Advisor)6 to monitor the
running containers. cAdvisor has the same approach as Metricbeat and Netdata
– it gathers container metrics, such as CPU and memory through cgroups. Fre-
quency is conﬁgured the same way (1/5/10 s) as the previous two tools.
As for Zipkin7, the integration with the TTS is made with Java Sleuth8. It
is conﬁgured using the PercentageBasedSampler, i.e., only a given proportion of
traces are stored. The frequency is changed using probabilistic sampling: only a
conﬁgurable percent of the traces are processed and stored. The setting for high
is 100%, for medium 50%, and for low 25%. Further details about the integration
are in the replication package: each integration has its own Compose ﬁle deﬁning
the services, networks, and volumes required to run the tools alongside the TTS.
4.2
Goal and Research Questions
The goal of the experiment is expressed via the Goal-Question-Metric app-
roach [2]: to analyze monitoring tools, for the purpose of evaluation, with respect
4 https://github.com/FudanSELab/train-ticket.
5 https://www.elastic.co/beats/metricbeat.
6 https://github.com/google/cadvisor.
7 https://zipkin.io/.
8 https://spring.io/projects/spring-cloud-sleuth.



--- PAGE 6 ---
186
M. Dinga et al.
to their energy and performance overhead, from the point of view of developers
and tool maintainers, in the context of Docker-based systems. The RQs are:
RQ1: What is the impact of using diﬀerent monitoring tools on the
energy eﬃciency of Docker-based systems?
RQ2: What is the impact of using diﬀerent monitoring tools on the
performance of Docker-based systems?
Several performance indicators are considered pertaining to resource con-
sumption and execution time, which will be analyzed individually. These are:
percentage of CPU utilization while running at user level; load average, com-
puted as the average number of runnable or running tasks (R state), and the
number of tasks in uninterruptible sleep (D state) over the last minute; percent-
age of used memory (RAM); number of input datagrams successfully delivered
per second to IP user-protocols, and total number of input datagrams received
per second, including those received in error; execution time in seconds.
4.3
Experiment Variables
To mitigate the mono-operation bias and to accurately represent the runtime
overhead of the tools, we consider the following independent variables.
Monitoring Tool, ﬁve levels: the baseline, where we run the TTS deployed
without any monitoring tool, plus the above-mentioned tools, Elasticsearch, Net-
data, Prometheus, and Zipkin. The tool is deployed along with the TTS.
Frequency: the scrape interval, in the case of tools that collect metrics
(Elasticsearch, Netdata, Prometheus), and the sampling interval, in the case of
the tracing tool (Zipkin). It is treated as a blocking factor with three levels
(high, medium, low). Ratio measures are transformed to ordinal ones based on
the minimum allowed scrape interval and maximum allowed sampling rate among
the tools. Based on this, level “high” corresponds to 1 s for metric collection tools
and 100% sampling rate for tracing tools, level “medium” is 5 s and 50% and
level “low” is 10 s and 25%, respectively.
Workload: the number of virtual users that stress the system during the
test. It is treated as a blocking factor with three levels (high, medium, low). The
mapping to ordinal scale considers the capabilities of the system as follows: level
high corresponds to the highest number of users supported such that the tests
are completed successfully (Table 2).
Deployment: the strategy used for deploying the system. This factor is ﬁxed,
in order to separate its eﬀect from the main factor. The monitoring tools, next
to the TTS are deployed on a single Ubuntu machine using Docker Compose V2
for running the containers on Docker platform.
The dependent variables are: Energy eﬃciency (total energy consumed
(Joules) by TTS during a load test), and the above-deﬁned performance metrics
(CPU usage, CPU load, RAM usage, Network traﬃc, Execution time).
The null hypotheses for RQ1 and RQ2 state that a dependent variable does not
signiﬁcantly diﬀer when using diﬀerent monitoring tools. The proper hypothesis
tests will be used depending on the data characteristics. Table 2 shows the ratio
values for the co-factors (frequency and workload).



--- PAGE 7 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
187
Table 2. Ratio values corresponding to treatments for every monitoring tool
Tool
Frequency
Workload
Low Medium High
Low Medium High
ELK Stack
10 s
5 s
1 s
10
20
40
Netdata
10 s
5 s
1 s
10
20
40
Prometheus 10 s
5 s
1 s
10
20
40
Zipkin
25% 50%
100% 10
20
40
4.4
Experiment Design
We alternate every possible combination (4 monitoring tools plus the baseline,
3 frequency levels, and 3 workload levels) of all of the levels across all inde-
pendent variables, following a 5 × 3 × 3 full factorial design. We do not consider
frequency in the case of the baseline treatment, since it does not apply in that
case. This means we only have 3 runs for the baseline, for 3 levels of workload,
leading to 39 trials in total, i.e., (5 × 3 × 3)-6. We aim to keep the monitoring
tool eﬀect at the core of the experiment, while also considering frequency and
workload as factors that might inﬂuence energy eﬃciency. In order to mitigate
their eﬀect and to ensure an unbiased assignment, we analyze each combination
of the co-factors separately, resulting in 9 diﬀerent blocks. The results might
diﬀer depending on how energy and performance are aﬀected at runtime when
running the experiment under diﬀerent frequency and workload conditions.
Each of the 39 runs is repeated 10 times and in randomized execution order,
to mitigate the potential bias caused by the order in which tools are run.
4.5
Experiment Execution
Testbed. The experiment is performed on a machine with a 64-bit Intel(R)
Xeon(R) CPU E3-1231 v3 @ 3.40 GHz octa-core processor, 32 GB RAM, running
Ubuntu Server 18.04 as operating system, which runs TTS and the monitoring
tool. The server is fully dedicated to this experiment to reduce the chances of
external factors contributing to the energy and performance measurements. The
scripts orchestrating and running the experiments and the results of the energy
measurements are run on two further separate machines to avoid bias.
Metrics Collection. For energy measurements collection, we opted for mea-
suring energy at machine level using a physical power meter. Speciﬁcally, the
Watts Up Pro power meter is used to collect power measures from the moni-
tored server, in watts (W), at one second intervals, then used to compute energy
(J). For performance measurements, we use SAR, a system utility allowing for
monitoring the resources of a Linux system, again with a one-second interval.
Experiment Execution. Each run has a proﬁling time of 13.7 min on average,
which may vary depending on the execution time of the load test. We add 3 min
idle time between consecutive runs to guards against carryover eﬀects (consecu-
tive runs inﬂuencing each other) [15] and 10 min, for system initialization, which



--- PAGE 8 ---
188
M. Dinga et al.
leads to 26.7 min to complete one run. We perform 10 runs for every trial (39 tri-
als), resulting in 390 runs in total, executing for 10,413 min (more than 7 d). We
set the execution time for a run to be at least 10 min, taking into account the fre-
quency of 1 s at which Watts Up Pro collects energy measurements. This results
in at least 600 measurements for a run, which allows to accurately compute the
energy eﬃciency.
We orchestrated the experiment using Experiment Runner9, a Python-based
framework for automatically executing experiments targeting software systems.
For each run, these steps are performed: (i) deploy of TTS along with the chosen
monitoring tool, (ii) start monitoring energy and performance (with Watts Up
Pro and SAR), (iii) interact with the system by triggering a load test script, (iv)
stop monitoring once the load test has completed, (v) stop all processes related
to TTS, or to the monitoring tool running alongside, (vi) clean up the system
by removing all unused local volumes and restarting Docker Engine.
Workload. The load test script was obtained by merging together a set of scripts
generated with K610, an open-source load testing tool. K6 can generate scripts
for performance testing starting from the Swagger/OpenAPI speciﬁcation of the
REST APIs. We obtain 34 scripts for each of the 34 microservices which are
integrated with Swagger. The scripts are included in the replication package of
the study. Each of the scripts is stressing a diﬀerent microservice by interacting
with its API. Since the requests propagate through the entire system, the 7
remaining microservices which are not directly tested are also interacted with.
The 34 scripts are merged together into a single load test script which will
be used during a run to stress the entire system. We perform multiple itera-
tions of this script, with several virtual users (10, 20 and 40), to ensure that the
duration of a run is at least 10 min. On average, each user performs the same
amount of work (i.e., 34.5 iterations of the load test script in one run). The
replication package contains: (i) the raw measures, (ii) the scripts for data pro-
cessing and analysis and (iii) the scripts to automate the experiment execution.
5
Results
5.1
Results on Energy Eﬃciency (RQ1)
Figure 1 reports the energy consumed by the compared tools, with values ranging
from 38,552 to 88,516 J. The coeﬃcient of variation is between 21.3% and 26.8%
and the standard deviation shows that the data is relatively disperse (13,453
globally), which most probably comes from the diﬀerence among the frequency-
workload blocks. Considering the mean values (the diamond in the box plot),
there is a visible diﬀerence between the baseline (53,755 J) and running a tool
alongside the TTS (54,543 J, 55,046 J, 56,760 J, 60,668 J, respectively for Net-
data, Prometheus, ELK Stack, Zipkin). As expected, the tools have a footprint
on energy, with Netdata being the most energy-eﬃcient tool and Zipkin the
9 https://github.com/S2-group/experiment-runner.
10 https://k6.io/.



--- PAGE 9 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
189
Fig. 1. Energy eﬃciency across monitoring tools
least one. Median values (the bars in the plot) are slightly lower but conﬁrm
the ranking. The distributions are similar to each other, with Zipkin having the
highest variance (ranging from 38,552 J to 88,516 J). All the distributions are
highly bimodal, with two separate groups, suggesting an impact of the blocking
factors, frequency and workload. Figure 2 reports the results by block, showing
that Zipkin consumes more than other monitoring tools when the workload is
high.
Fig. 2. Energy eﬃciency across all frequency and workload level combinations
To statistically analyze the data, we ﬁrst run Shapiro-Wilks test to check
for normality for each of the 9 blocks. Results are in Table 3, SW column, with
signiﬁcance level α = 0.05. The p-value for testing the null hypothesis, stating
that the energy sample is drawn from a normal distribution, is lower than 0.05 for
7 blocks out of 9, even after applying various data transformations (logarithmic,
reciprocal, square root and exponential). We conclude that data are mostly not
normally distributed for energy, hence we proceed with non-parametric statistical



--- PAGE 10 ---
190
M. Dinga et al.
Table 3. Results of Shapiro-Wilk (SW) and Kruskal-Wallis (KW) tests for each fre-
quency (F) and workload (W) block. Bold text denotes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (α = .05)
Block
SW (p-value) KW (p-value) η2
η2 interpretation
F Low, W Low
0.00113
0.00156
0.3
large
F Low, W Medium
0.0939
0.21
0.0413 small
F Low, W High
0.0157
3.77e-06
0.59
large
F Medium, W Low
0.0172
0.00157
0.299
large
F Medium, W Medium 0.019
0.303
0.0189 small
F Medium, W High
0.00228
1.17e-06
0.645
large
F High, W Low
9.25e-05
0.154
0.0594 small
F High, W Medium
0.0826
0.022
0.165
large
F High, W High
9.52e-05
4.58e-07
0.69
large
tests. Speciﬁcally, we apply the Kruskal-Wallis test to determine if at least one
of the monitoring tools diﬀer from the others. The p-values are lower than the
α = 0.05 (Table 3, column KW) for 6 out of 9 blokcs. It means that for those
blocks a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in energy eﬃciency among monitoring tools is
detected. The magnitude of variability in energy eﬃciency attributable to the
monitoring tools, computed as the eta-squared statistic [12], η2, is generally
large, for all the statistically signiﬁcant results (Table 3, last two columns).
Table 4. Results of the Wilcoxon test - frequency (F) and workload (W) combination
of treatments (block). Bold text denotes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (α = .05)
Tool
Block
p-value
Cliﬀ’s δ δ interpretation
ELK stack
F Low, W High
0.002
−0.86
large
F Medium, W Low
0.015
−0.72
large
F Medium, W High 0.733e-03 −0.94
large
F High, W High
0.825e-03 −0.96
large
Netdata
F High, W High
0.014
−0.68
large
Prometheus F Medium, W Low
0.015
−0.70
large
F High, W High
0.026
−0.60
large
Zipkin
F Low, W High
0.458e-03 −1.00
large
F Medium, W Low
0.009
−0.84
large
F Medium, W High 0.458e-03 −1.00
large
F High, W High
0.825e-03 −1.00
large



--- PAGE 11 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
191
Table 5. Dunn test (α = 0.05) per block. grey: not signiﬁcant, green: signiﬁcant
As a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the tools exists, we perform a pairwise
comparison between each monitoring tool and the baseline, by applying the
Wilcoxon test across all blocks with Benjamini-Hochberg (B-H) correction for
multiple-comparison protection. There is signiﬁcant diﬀerence for every tool for
at least one block (Table 4). The Cliﬀ’s delta for those blocks shows a large eﬀect
according to the interpretation by Romano [13]. Also, Table 5 reports the Dunn’s
test comparing each tool with each other. Both these tests conﬁrm that Zipkin
is the most-consuming tool, followed by ELK stack.
Result 1 - Monitoring tools signiﬁcantly impact the energy eﬃciency of
Docker-based systems, under several (6 out of 9) frequency and workload
conditions. Not all tools have the same impact; Zipkin has the largest neg-
ative impact. A high workload contributes markedly to high consumption
of all the tools, and exacerbates the diﬀerence between the tools.
5.2
Results on Performance (RQ2)
Figure 3 reports performance. The replication package contains Tables with sum-
mary statistics of these results. The CPU usage percentage is 52.4% on average
globally, with the lowest recorded values for ELK stack (49.0%) and the highest
for Zipkin (57.6%). Apart from Zipkin, there seems to be a negligible diﬀer-
ence between the baseline and the tools. For the CPU load average, Zipkin still
shows the highest value, 18.4, while Netdata and Prometheus show the lower
ones (16.6). RAM usage has a very low standard deviation. The mean is 70.7%,
with the minimum average value for the baseline (65.1%) and the highest for
ELK stack (99.2%). This means that ELK stack has a very high memory foot-
print, keeping the RAM usage close to the maximum capacity throughout the
execution of the load test. This phenomenon might be an indication of the high
energy consumption of ELK stack, where we obtained a signiﬁcant diﬀerence for
4 out of 9 blocks (Table 4). Also, Zipkin tends to be more memory- and CPU-
intensive than other monitoring tools like Netdata and Prometheus, and also
in this case Zipking was shown to consume more energy than the baseline for
4 out of 9 blocks. In terms of execution time, looking at the mean values, it is
not highly impacted by tools such as Netdata and Prometheus. ELK stack and
Zipkin however have the highest execution time on average. A run has a duration
of 13.7 min on average, with the minimum being 10 min (for Prometheus) and a
maximum of 18 min (for Zipkin).



--- PAGE 12 ---
192
M. Dinga et al.
Fig. 3. Dependent variables across monitoring tools
Table 6. Results of the Shapiro-Wilk test for each frequency (F) and workload (W)
block. Bold text denotes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (α = .05)
Block
CPU
Memory
Network
Load
Exec. time
F Low, W Low
0.000412 1.07e-05 0.0015
0.178
2.81e-05
F Low, W Medium
0.000864 9.09e-06 0.298
3.88e-06
0.585
F Low, W High
0.014
1.95e-05 0.323
0.575
0.0807
F Medium, W Low
0.435
1.02e-05 1.94e-05 0.212
7.77e-05
F Medium, W Medium 0.00248
1.01e-05 0.114
3.68e-07
0.00395
F Medium, W High
0.388
8.72e-05 0.533
0.639
0.59
F High, W Low
0.693
5.94e-06 0.00158
0.657
0.000204
F High, W Medium
0.0466
1.71e-05 0.066
0.000453 0.518
F High, W High
0.183
5.43e-05 0.0041
0.111
0.0317
Result 2 - Monitoring tools like Zipkin (for CPU) and ELK Stack (for
RAM) increase the resources’ usage and aﬀect the execution times more
than other tools. The same result was observed with total energy con-
sumed.



--- PAGE 13 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
193
The mean network traﬃc is similar for all the tools. This is expected, since the
same amount of traﬃc is likely generated while running the load test. The distri-
butions in all the cases except for RAM are bimodal, highlighting the variability
among the diﬀerent blocks.
The Shapiro-Wilk normality tests (Table 6) show that in most cases data are
not normally distributed for any of the dependent variables.
As before, we run the Kruskal-Wallis test for each variables to detect a pos-
sible diﬀerence between the monitoring tools on performance. For CPU usage,
CPU load, and RAM usage, the obtained p-values are signiﬁcant forall the blocks.
The magnitude of the diﬀerence attributable to the tool (eta-squared statistic)
is large in 9 out 9, 2 out of 9, and 9 out 9 cases for CPU usage, CPU load, and
RAM usage, respectively. For network traﬃc and execution time, the diﬀerence
is signiﬁcant only in 2 and 4 cases, respectively. The Tables per variable with
KW p-values and η2 results are in the replication package.
The Wilcoxon test across all blocks, with the B-H correction, compares each
tool against the baseline. Results are hereafter summarized:
– CPU Usage: In general, for ELK stack and Zipkin there is a signiﬁcant
impact of monitoring tools on CPU usage. The trend is more pronounced
under a high workload. The p-values for 3 blocks allow to reject the null
hypothesis that the median diﬀerence between the baseline and ELK stack
is zero. The same stands for 6 blocks regarding Zipkin. This conﬁrms the
previous observations. Also, the Cliﬀ’s delta reveal always a large eﬀect when
the p-values are signiﬁcant.
– CPU Load: For Zipkin and Netdata there is at least one block where the
impact on CPU load is signiﬁcant. This means that these tools can inﬂuence
CPU load under speciﬁc frequency and workload conditions.
– RAM Usage: Except for Netdata, there is statistical signiﬁcance for every
tool, for at least one block. The Cliﬀ’s delta eﬀect size is large for all these
blocks but one (on Prometheus). The results for ELK stack further conﬁrm
the previous observations that ELK stack has a very high memory footprint
(under all workload-frequency conditions, RAM usage is close to 100%).
– Network Traﬃc: In general, there is no statistical signiﬁcance for network
traﬃc (only in one block for Netdata, Prometheus and Zipkin the diﬀerence
is signiﬁcant). This is expected, as running a monitoring tool should not
inﬂuence the network traﬃc generated by running the load test.
– Execution Time: In case of ELK stack and Zipkin there is statistical signiﬁ-
cance and Cliﬀ’s delta estimates show large eﬀect size. Again, a high workload
increases the impact and exacerbates the diﬀerences: the longest execution
time is for Zipkin under the high workload-high frequency conﬁguration (more
details in the replication package plots). For Netdata and Prometheus, there
are no statistically signiﬁcant results.



--- PAGE 14 ---
194
M. Dinga et al.
Result 3 - Monitoring tools inﬂuence the CPU usage, CPU load, RAM
usage and execution time, under speciﬁc frequency and workload condi-
tions. Zipkin and ELK stack have the largest impact, exacerbated when
running under high workload conditions.
Table 7. Correlation coeﬃcients
CPU usage CPU load RAM usage Execution time Network
Pearson
0.859
0.899
0.187
0.867
0.961
Spearman 0.829
0.851
0.290
0.796
0.954
Finally, we analyze each dependent variable in relation to energy eﬃciency
(Table 7). CPU usage, load average and execution time are strongly correlated
with energy eﬃciency. Although this does not imply causation, their reduction
can potentially improve energy eﬃciency. However, there is a relatively small
correlation between RAM usage and energy eﬃciency. This also explains why
ELK stack is not worse than Zipkin in terms of energy consumption, despite its
intensive use of RAM. The correlation between network traﬃc and energy eﬃ-
ciency is also high, primarily due to the presence of 3 groups each corresponding
to a level of workload – high network traﬃc leads to the highest energy values,
while low network traﬃc leads to the lowest values.
Result 4 - CPU usage, CPU load average and execution time are strongly
correlated with energy eﬃciency.
6
Threats to Validity
Internal Validity. To mitigate the history threat, where events occurring at the
same time a treatment is applied could produce the eﬀect, we repeat each run
10 times. Also, to avoid order eﬀects, execution order is randomized. To avoid
carryover eﬀects (i.e., consecutive treatments inﬂuencing each other), we stop
the running systems and wait for 3 min before starting the next run. We also
alternate the baseline with the other treatments, as a best practice to be able to
verify any noticeable changes in absence of intervention. We address the ambigu-
ous temporal precedence threat by ensuring replication of the exact sequence of
independent variables manipulation, thanks to the Experiment Runner tool.
External Validity. We select well-known monitoring tools for microservices, con-
sidering their popularity on GitHub. Clearly, diﬀerent tools might impact energy
and performance diﬀerently. To mitigate this risk, we applied a minimalistic
setup, following the documentation to avoid introducing unnecessary confound-
ing variables (due to additional components, for instance). We compared the



--- PAGE 15 ---
Evaluating Energy and Performance Overhead of Monitoring Tools
195
tools on a widely used microservice benchmark application, Train Ticket; though,
using another application would lead to diﬀerent results. Future replications of
this experiment will help in mitigating this potential source of bias.
Construct Validity. We are conﬁdent about the integration of the monitoring
tools, as we carefully tested each of them running alongside the system before
running the experiment. The implementation is publicly available. Also, hard-
ware power meters, like the one we used, are known to have high accuracy and
do not inﬂuence the measured system [6].
7
Conclusions and Future Work
In this study we conducted an empirical assessment of the energy and per-
formance overhead of monitoring tools on Docker-based systems. We obtained
signiﬁcant results in terms of energy and performance (CPU usage, CPU load,
RAM usage, network traﬃc and execution time), under speciﬁc frequency and
workload conditions. Not all the tools impact energy eﬃciency and performance
in the same way, but we observed a high energy consumption and a high CPU,
RAM and execution time for the same tools. The correlation analysis conﬁrms
the association for CPU and execution time, but not for memory, hence the lat-
ter is likely to have a smaller impact on energy. For a more granular analysis,
to be able to detect energy hotspots in monitoring tools, we plan to deploy a
software power meter in a future iteration, such as SmartWatts11, that measures
energy at container level.
Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklo- dowska-Curie
grant agreement No 871342 “uDEVOPS”.
References
1. Microservices (2023). https://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html
2. Basili, V.R.: Software Modeling and Measurement: The Goal Question Metric
Paradigm. Computer Science Technical Report Series, CS-TR-2956 (1992)
3. Cortellessa, V., Di Pompeo, D., Eramo, R., Tucci, M.: A model-driven approach for
continuous performance engineering in microservice-based systems. J. Syst. Softw.
183, 111084 (2022)
4. Di Francesco, P., Lago, P., Malavolta, I.: Architecting with microservices: a sys-
tematic mapping study. J. Syst. Softw. 150, 77–97 (2019)
5. Ergasheva, S., Khomyakov, I., Kruglov, A., Succi, G.: Metrics of energy consump-
tion in software systems: a systematic literature review. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth
Environ. Sci. 431, 012051 (2020)
6. Fahad, M., Shahid, A., Manumachu, R.R., Lastovetsky, A.: A comparative study
of methods for measurement of energy of computing. Energies 12(11), 2204 (2019)
7. Heward, G., M¨uller, I., Han, J., Schneider, J.G., Versteeg, S.: Assessing the perfor-
mance impact of service monitoring. In: ASWEC 2010, pp. 192–201. IEEE (2010)
11 https://powerapi-ng.github.io/smartwatts.html.



--- PAGE 16 ---
196
M. Dinga et al.
8. Hirst, J.M., Miller, J.R., Kaplan, B.A., Reed, D.D.: Watts up? pro ac power meter
for automated energy recording (2013)
9. Khomh, F., Abtahizadeh, S.A.: Understanding the impact of cloud patterns on
performance and energy consumption. J. Syst. Softw. 141, 151–170 (2018)
10. Liu, M., Peter, S., Krishnamurthy, A., Phothilimthana, P.M.: E3: energy-eﬃcient
microservices on smartnic-accelerated servers. In: USENIX, pp. 363–378 (2019)
11. Merkel, D., et al.: Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent development
and deployment. Linux j 239(2), 2 (2014)
12. Pierce, C.A., Block, R.A., Aguinis, H.: Cautionary note on reporting eta-squared
values from multifactor ANOVA designs. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 64(6), 916–924
(2004)
13. Romano, J., Kromrey, J.D., Coraggio, J., Skowronek, J.: Appropriate statistics for
ordinal level data: Should we really be using t-test and cohen’sd for evaluating
group diﬀerences on the NSSE and other surveys. In: FAIR, vol. 177, p. 34 (2006)
14. Santos, E.A., McLean, C., Solinas, C., Hindle, A.: How does docker aﬀect energy
consumption? evaluating workloads in and out of docker containers. J. Syst. Softw.
146, 14–25 (2018)
15. Vegas, S., Apa, C., Juristo, N.: Crossover designs in software engineering experi-
ments: beneﬁts and perils. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 42(2), 120–135 (2015)
16. Verdecchia, R., Lago, P., Ebert, C., de Vries, C.: Green it and green software. IEEE
Softw. 38(6), 7–15 (2021)
17. Zhou, X., et al.: Benchmarking microservice systems for software engineering
research. In: 40th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE) (2018)
