

--- PAGE 1 ---
Monitoring Container Services at the Network Edge
Marcel Großmann and Clemens Klug
Computer Networks Group, University of Bamberg
Bamberg, Germany
Email: {marcel.grossmann | clemens.klug}@uni-bamberg.de
Abstract—Recent developments induced by the Internet of
Things (IoT) force a paradigm shift to deploy on demand
services to a broad range of different computing architectures.
Mainly single board computers (SBCs) gained a lot of attraction
in recent years, shifting highly available processing power to
service consumers and IoT devices. Simultaneously, container
virtualization achieved a breakthrough by the well known Docker
environment that became a key competitor to the utilization
of virtual machines. Nevertheless, spreading containers at small
scale needs a proper allocation of resources available on SBCs.
As a ﬁrst step, we developed a multi-architecture framework
“PyMon” to monitor different computing architectures with a
small footprint. PyMon itself is based on the recent version of
“monit” and a “Django” application to collect monitoring data. It
is delivered by several Docker images and allows monitoring with
a reasonable processing overhead. Our demonstration shows the
statistics of either processes or containers running on a cluster
of SBCs, where each member is monitored. Furthermore, we
evaluated the resource usage of the two key competitors for
container cluster management on SBCs, Kubernetes and Docker
Swarm, with PyMon.
Keywords—Container Virtualization; Cluster Computing; Dis-
tributed Computing; Mesh Networking; Privacy; Reliability;
Redundancy; QoS;
I. INTRODUCTION
The foundation of everything as a service (XaaS) is mainly
based on the uprising of virtualization technology utilized
in cloud data centers. Nowadays, virtual machines are the
workhorses to effectively provide services and modern com-
munication infrastructures running on top of physical servers,
which are aggregated to powerful computing clusters. Within
the software virtualization scalability, redundancy, availability,
and reliability issues are satisﬁed.
However, rapid developments in the Internet of Things
(IoT), which include larger structures, e.g., smart homes, smart
cars, and smart cities, are challenging this traditional approach
of service deployment [cf. 1]. By using traditional distributed
data center approaches for IoT purposes, transmission of
mainly unnecessary data burdens the core network. Fog and
Edge Computing proposed by Yi et al. [2] is one proposal
to shift virtualized service of cloud data centers towards the
network edge. Due to recent advances in designing energy-
efﬁcient, cheap, and low cost single board computers (SBC),
positioning computing power near to the consumers of services
is easy to obtain. By empowering the edge network in this
manner, the core network drops its bottleneck state.
But, what about virtualization? Virtualization is undergoing
a paradigm shift due to the success of container virtualization
approaches, particularly with regard to the rise of Docker’s
community and its corresponding open source framework.
Besides, the Docker Inc. established a viable ecosystem around
the container technology to make it easily accessible for
everyone. In addition, due to signiﬁcant efforts of the Hypriot
Team1, the Docker engine was ported to the ARM platform
and is ofﬁcially supported by Docker since release 1.12.12. It
allows to run processes efﬁciently at highest speed on SBCs
without the overhead of a hypervisor using lightweight kernel
namespaces derived from Linux. This development strengthens
the feasibility to realize clustered edge computing infrastruc-
tures, with nearly the same advantages as data center provided
services offer. Therefore, it is no wonder that orchestration
tools like Docker Swarm and Kubernetes are already realized
on ARM based SBCs. Until now, a skillful placement of
containerized services on small devices is challenging due to
the lack of monitoring approaches for containers on SBCs.
Of course, the ecosystem of container monitoring solutions
is rapidly changing3, but by executing tools like Google’s
cAdvisor4 attached to Prometheus5 on small devices utilizes
too much resources to be a feasible SBC monitoring solution.
In this paper, we show a tinier monitoring solution, es-
pecially designed for SBCs, called PyMon, which is made
publicly available on Github6. PyMon extends the host-based
monitoring tool monit7 with capabilities to inspect running
Docker containers. It is delivered by Docker images and they
run on architectures supporting Docker, namely x86_64, ARM
and AARCH64.
II. STRUCTURE OF MONITORING FRAMEWORK PYMON
The framework PyMon is structured in a modular manner
and is packaged into several Docker images. Figure 1 shows
the linkage of all modules, which may be deﬁned in a docker-
compose ﬁle. In a brief summary, PyMon can be separated in
two main parts: The server application, consisting of Caddy8
as a load-balancing proxy server, PyMon to collect and analyze
data, and a Postgres database to save all captures; and a monit
instance for each monitored host.
1https://blog.hypriot.com
2https://github.com/docker/docker/releases/tag/v1.12.1
3http://rancher.com/comparing-monitoring-options-for-docker-
deployments/
4https://github.com/google/cadvisor
5https://prometheus.io/
6https://github.com/whatever4711/PyMon
7https://mmonit.com/monit/
8https://caddyserver.com/
2017 29th International Teletraffic Congress
978-0-9883-0453-6/17 $31.00 © 2017 ITC
DOI 10.1109/ITC.2017.47
130
2017 29th International Teletraffic Congress (ITC 29)
978-0-9883-0453-6/17 $31.00 © 2017 ITC
DOI 10.1109/ITC.29.101
130
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
Monit
<privileged>
monit:armhf-latest
Monit
<privileged>
monit:aarch64-latest
PyMon
pymon:amd64-latest
Caddy
caddy:amd64-latest
Postgres
postgres:amd64-latest
RPi
Pine64
PyMon Server
POST
POST
pymon:8000
postgres:5432
Figure 1. Architecture of the PyMon framework
A virtual network is established to interconnect the server
application modules, in a way that Caddy, PyMon, and Post-
gres can communicate. Additionally, Caddy is attached to an
externally reachable network, such that it accepts all HTTP
trafﬁc and forwards all incoming trafﬁc to PyMon.
A. Monit
We extended monit with an API to inspect running Docker
containers and monitor their resource utilization. Therefore,
it should run as a privileged container to be able to access
the Docker socket. An instance of this container monitors all
containers on the respective host system, including the monit
container itself.
Listing 1 Code to capture container statistics
def update_stats(self, data):
old=containers[self.id]["stats"]
new={
"cpu": container_cpu_percent(data),
"memory": data["memory_stats"]["usage"]
}
for m in self.__metrics:
self.history[m].append(new[m])
new[m]=statistics.mean(self.history[m])
containers[self.id]["stats"] = new
The extension wraps collected data about containers into
a JSON element and transmits it to the PyMon server. Due
to the streaming API of Docker statistics, a dedicated service
is started through monit on each monitored host. The CPU
usage reported by Docker is speciﬁed as active CPU time of
a container. To derive the percentage of CPU consumption
we have to intersect container and system CPU times. A
monit service uses threads for all running containers to process
all statistic streams in parallel. The service includes a basic
HTTP server, offering a JSON-encoded dictionary of container
metrics with aggregated measurements since the last poll. This
is requested regularly via a monit check progress, where the
JSON object is passed to stdout and therefore included in
the report by monit. Listing 2 shows an example of a statistic
Figure 2. Structure of database
summary of a recently started Kubernetes dashboard container
(gcr.io/google_containers/kubernetes-dashboard-arm:v1.5.1).
Listing 2 Example of container statistics
{"59f0b9d4752..": {
"image": "kubernetes-dashboard-arm:v1.5.1",
"status": "Up 28 seconds",
"name": "/k8s_kubernetes-dashboard.314..",
"state": "running",
"stats": {
"cpu": 0.00310019557823129,
"memory": 5283840
}}}
Additionally, various other host-speciﬁc metrics are con-
ﬁgured to be measured (CPU, memory, network trafﬁc). All
measurements are collected in a monit XML report and are
pushed to the Caddy HTTP server.
B. PyMon
The core is PyMon, a Django application, which runs inside
a container and receives all data from monitored hosts (see
subsection II-A). All collected data is stored in the Postgres
DB for seven days worth of regular updates to allow retro-
spective analysis while the accumulation of data is limited.
These stored measurements include the total CPU and memory
consumption of the server, as well as the network trafﬁc of
its interfaces and the metrics of running containers. The web
interface of the Django application offers graphs and tabular
overviews of the monitored systems’ states, while additional
plotting options are available through the management inter-
face.
C. Postgres DB
The database structure is derived from the Django ORM
mapping of monit XML reports. Figure 2 shows the resulting
structure, where our Docker statistics aggregator is a service
with a running process. Each monitored container refers to
this process and thus allows identiﬁcation of the server it is
running on.
131
131
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
Internal distributed state store
Manager
(leader)
Manager
(follower)
Manager
(follower)
Raft consensus group
Worker
Worker
Worker
Worker
Worker
Gossip network
|||
|||
|||
|||
Task
(a) Docker Swarm
API
Server
scheduler
replication
controller
Master
kubelet
cAdvisor
proxy
Pod
labels
Pod
labels
Minion
kubelet
cAdvisor
proxy
Pod
labels
Pod
labels
Minion
distributed
storage
etcd
kubectl
(b) Kubernetes
Figure 3. Simpliﬁed versions of architectures for cluster management.
III. MEASUREMENTS FOR A FOG COMPUTING CLUSTER
Among a few data center orchestration engines, for in-
stance OpenStack, Pacemaker, Marathon, etc., we selected
ARM compatible ones as trial environment. By evaluating
four possible candidates, we ﬁgured out that Mesos and
Nomad are either to complex or with limited support for
ARM architectures. Thus, we chose Kubernetes, which is
unofﬁcially supported for ARM, and Docker Swarm mode.
This being said, Docker and Kubernetes became two potential
competitors as tools for high availability on small platforms. It
is interesting to evaluate their performance against each other,
and we compare these two technologies according to their
basic resource consumption.
A. Docker Swarm on ARM
Within the release of Docker 1.12 all clustering features
are implemented in the Docker engine. The “Swarm Mode”9
activates its cluster capabilities and features for cluster man-
agement are complete for orchestration purposes, even if the
feature set is not as large as the one of Kubernetes. The
Docker engine carries all mandatory features for master nodes
and worker nodes as depicted in Figure 3a. The manager
nodes, starting in the follower state, use the Raft Consensus
Algorithm to handle the global cluster state10 and elect one
leader node for the cluster. In combination with the inter-
nal distributed state store, the cluster state, health checks,
and eventually fault tolerance capabilities are provided. On
manager nodes services are created, which are the blueprints
of tasks to be executed on worker nodes; normally, manager
nodes possess worker capabilities too. Services can be scaled,
thus they provide several replicated tasks across the cluster.
Moreover, stacks, a combination of several services, can be
deﬁned and deployed against a master node.
B. Kubernetes on ARM
Kubernetes has been open sourced in 2014 and it provides
the experience that Google gathered with their internal or-
chestration platform “Borg”. Thus, Kubernetes is seen as very
reliable and well tested. In contrast to Docker, it provides
9https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/
10https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/raft/
much more abstractions that enable provisioning highly tai-
lored deployments. Some of the features that Docker Swarm
Mode does not provide, are: centralized logging, identity and
authorization or resource monitoring and more11. Kubernete’s
main concepts have much in common with Docker Swarm
Mode: Pods are the smallest deployable units, which are
created, scheduled, and managed. Internally, they consist of a
logical collection of containers that belong to an application.
Worker nodes are also called Minions, which are managed
by the Master node. “Minions can run one or more pods.
It provides an application-speciﬁc “virtual host” in a con-
tainerized environment” [3]. The command line tool kubecfg
and its related tool set is used to control overall settings of
the cluster, such as replication controllers and the scheduler.
Kubernetes uses etcd as key-value-store and offers a central
API that takes management commands from the operator,
as depicted in Figure 3b. Obviously, this implementation is
very similar to Docker Swarm. Nevertheless, one difference
exists in the leader election, where Kubernetes uses its own
implementation.
C. PyMon Measurements
In our trial we use Docker in version 17.03.0-ce released
in March 2017 for the measurements of Docker Swarm and
Kubernetes. The hardware basis was provided by PicoCluster
Ltd., which is a hardware stack of three RPis. Additionally, we
provided a fourth RPi that acts as master node in our trials. We
prepared four 16GB SD cards from SanDisk, with read speed
up to 80MB/s and write speed up to 20MB/s, with Hypriot
OS and plugged them into all RPis. All devices are connected
with an Asus RT-AC68U, which provides a 1Gbit/s switching
fabric. Like depicted in Figure 1, we let Monit run natively
on all RPis to be able to switch between Kubernetes and
Docker Swarm without disrupting the data collection process.
PyMon is installed on a Pine64+12 AARCH64 SBC, which
is connected to the network via its WiFi interface. The trial
network is self-contained, such that no other entities, which
may send broadcast messages into the network and disturb our
measurements, have any inﬂuence.
11http://kubernetes.io/docs/whatisk8s/
12https://www.pine64.org/
132
132
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
(a) Docker Swarm
(b) Kubernetes
Figure 4. Comparison of CPU utilization
(a) Docker Swarm
(b) Kubernetes
Figure 5. Comparison of memory utilization
D. Results
By comparing the results of the total CPU utilization of
Figure 4 we see that Kubernetes uses around 30 percent CPU
at the master node in its idle state and around 10 percent at
the worker nodes. In both cases, Docker swarm requires less
CPU utilization and should be the preferred solution for fog or
edge clusters. Similar are the results for overall memory usage.
As depicted in Figure 5, Kubernetes needs more memory
compared to Docker running in Swarm Mode.
However, this comparison is not quite fair. As already men-
tioned, Kubernetes’ capabilities are much more sophisticated
and customizable than Docker Swarm Mode’s. In addition,
Kubernetes is much more feature rich than Docker and comes
with essential services by default. Disabling them the hard
way is probably risky for the stability of the cluster.
IV. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
We
provided
a
prototypical
implementation
of
our
lightweight monitoring framework PyMon, which is made
available for all relevant Docker enabled IoT infrastructures -
ARM, AARCH64 and x86_64 - on Dockerhub13. The system
is easy to setup and collects container statistics. In the future,
we would like to extend PyMon with an API that provides
resource consumption and statistics of a container to be able to
13https://hub.docker.com/r/whatever4711/pymon/
place new instantiations according to their needs. Furthermore,
we like to integrate an alerting system to classify resource
usage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Nicor Lengert for his
previous work on PyMon’s Django instance, the Hypriot
team for the portation of Docker to ARM platforms, and L.
Kaldström for the project “Kubernetes on ARM”14.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aled-
hari, and M. Ayyash, “Internet of things: a survey
on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications”,
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 2347–2376, Jun. 2015, ISSN: 1553-877X. DOI: 10.
1109/COMST.2015.2444095.
[2]
S. Yi, C. Li, and Q. Li, “A survey of fog computing:
concepts, applications and issues”, in Proceedings of the
2015 Workshop on Mobile Big Data, ser. Mobidata ’15,
Hangzhou, China: ACM, 2015, pp. 37–42, ISBN: 978-1-
4503-3524-9. DOI: 10.1145/2757384.2757397.
[3]
A. Gupta, Miles to go 3.0, (accessed 2016-Okt-14), 2015.
[Online]. Available: http : / / blog . arungupta . me / key -
concepts-kubernetes/.
14https://luxaslabs.com
133
133
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
