

--- PAGE 1 ---
Container Workload Characterization Through Host
System Tracing
Madeline Janecek
Department of Computer Science
Brock University
St. Catharines, Canada
mj17th@brocku.ca
Naser Ezzati-Jivan
Department of Computer Science
Brock University
St. Catharines, Canada
nezzati@brocku.ca
Seyed Vahid Azhari
Department of Comp. and Soft. Engineering
Polytechnique Montreal
Montreal, Canada
seyed-vahid.azhari@polymtl.ca
Abstract—The use of containers within cloud environments
has become increasing popular due to their lightweight nature,
scalability, and efﬁciency. However, as containers share their
host’s resources, advanced resource management techniques are
essential to avoid performance impacting resource contention.
Coarse measures such as CPU, disk, and network usage collected
from internal agents are often considered, yet these methods may
be improved upon to garner a more precise view of container
workloads.
In this paper, we present a container workload characteriza-
tion method using host system tracing. Features derived from
thread execution states are taken from tracing data to reveal
container runtime behaviour. A PageRank-based algorithm is
then used to identify the most signiﬁcant threads for further
analysis. Once this data is collected and vectorized, a two stage
K-Means clustering technique is used to generate groups of
containers with similar workloads. This eliminates the need for
manual analysis of individual containers, and instead allows
administrators to view and address container behaviours col-
lectively. Experimental results show that our methodology can
identify a variety of execution behaviours. Administrators may
use these results to remove idle containers to free up system
resources. Moreover, they may identify clusters of containers that
are at risk of resource contention, allowing for more effective
resource assignment.
Index Terms—workload characterization, virtualization, per-
formance analysis, containers, machine learning, K-Means
I. INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is an emerging technology that replaces
the need for active user management with ﬂexible, on-demand
access to shared resources. The use of containers to deploy
applications within cloud environments, commonly referred
to as Container-as-a-Service (CaaS), has grown increasingly
popular over the last few years [1, 2]. In the Cloud Native
Computing Foundation (CNCF)’s 2020 survey 92% of respon-
dents reported they are currently using containers within their
production environments, which is a 300% increase from just
2016 [3]. Containers provide several advantages, including
high efﬁciency, scalability, and portability. However, despite
all of their beneﬁts containers are not without their own draw-
backs. With container-based virtualization, containers share
host resources like CPU, disk, and memory. As the number
of concurrently running containers rises, so does the risk
of resource contention, latencies and performance problems.
Consequently, advanced resource management solutions are
essential to maintain high overall performance.
Many existing methods attempt to characterize container
resource usage through coarse-grained metrics, such as CPU
and memory usage, collected using internal tracking agents
[4, 5]. However, internal access to containers within commer-
cial cloud environments if often unavailable due to security
and privacy policies. In the cases where it is permitted, the
organization and maintenance of several internal agents can be
challenging at a cloud-scale. These considerations motivated
us to explore container workload characterization without
the use of such internal agents. Instead, we turn to kernel
execution tracing to obtain a more precise and detailed look
at container execution behaviour. This method has the added
beneﬁt of being independent of the container’s host. As such,
it may be applied to containers running within a single host,
a group of distributed nodes, within virtual machines in cloud
environment, and so forth.
We also work to utilize techniques that efﬁciently charac-
terize a large number of containers, as thousands of containers
may be deployed on a single server [6]. We argue that employ-
ing clustering algorithms to group containers based on their
runtime behaviour will reduce the complexity of large scale
monitoring. By presenting problematic containers collectively
rather than individually, administrators will be able to address
issues on a larger scale. For instance, should one of the
resulting clusters consist of idle containers, an administrator
could consider stopping them to free up system resources.
Furthermore, a cluster may group containerized applications
that are suffering from resource contention. The administrator
could respond by granting these applications access to more
of the appropriate resource, or move some of the containers
to another host.
In this paper, we propose a container workload characteriza-
tion framework that utilizes unsupervised clustering techniques
upon system level trace data. Firstly, we utilize a uniﬁed sys-
tem tracing method to collect detailed execution information
from the running containers. We then adapt the PageRank al-
gorithm [7] to select each container’s most relevant threads for
further analysis. This ensures that inactive or inconsequential
threads are not considered, resulting in a more consistent com-
parison between containers. Details regarding the execution
9
2021 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E)
978-1-6654-4970-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IC2E52221.2021.00015
2021 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E) | 978-1-6654-4970-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IC2E52221.2021.00015
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
states of these threads are extracted, aggregated, and vectorized
to create a single representation for each container. This data
is then used to cluster the containers into distinct groups with
a two stage clustering scheme using the popular K-Means
algorithm. The silhouette score is employed to automatically
determine the appropriate number of clusters. Experimental
results show that this methodology will effectively identify
both idle and intensive containerized processes.
The main contributions of this work are as follows: First,
we present our host based feature extraction method using
system tracing. Second, we explore a two stage clustering
technique to characterize container workloads. Third, we
evaluate the proposed approach on real data collected from
containers running with a variety of workloads.
The remaining parts of this paper are as follows: Firstly,
Section II discusses prior work related to the topic of cloud
container performance analysis and execution tracing. Then
Section III goes on to describe each step of our proposed
methodology. Section IV discusses our experimental set up
along with an analysis of its results. Section V then goes on to
discuss the computational overhead of this approach. Finally,
Section VI concludes this work.
II. RELATED WORK
One popular method within performance analysis is to
collect metrics such as CPU, memory, disk, and ﬁle usages.
In [4], L. Cai et al. collect similar metrics from running con-
tainers using open-source tools like cAdvisor and inﬂuxDB.
They utilize this data along with clustering techniques to
characterize a container’s resource usage. The results are used
to automatically conﬁgure parameters provided by commercial
container management tools to limit resource usage. Their
experimental results either meet or improve upon the container
performance seen using the default conﬁgurations.
In another work, Zhang et al. [5] propose using density-
based clustering along with performance related metrics to
detect abnormal behaviour within large scale cloud platforms.
They collect their performance metrics using BOSH agents.
Despite their good results, both the previously mentioned
works utilize internal resource monitoring agents to collect
their data. Execution tracing is a non-intrusive method that
may provide a more precise view of execution with minimal
performance impact, making it better suited for complex and
distributed systems [8].
Execution tracing is a well established tool for a variety of
performance related analyses, including performance anomaly
detection [9], root cause analysis [10], and program execution
comprehension [11]. Tracing tools such as LTTng [12] record
instrumentation points, commonly referred to as events, and
store them in a trace ﬁle. These events may be taken from
several different levels, such as the user-space, kernel, hard-
ware, and network levels. Tracers are capable of collecting
hundreds of thousands of events per second, resulting in a
detailed record of overall execution while imposing very little
overhead [13]. In [8], Giraleau et al. go on to describe how
meaningful resource utilization metrics can be extracted from
these kernel traces. As a container’s execution is handled by
its host’s operating system, we can use these tracing methods
to extract ﬁne-grained container resource usage metrics.
Other works have shown tracing’s effectiveness for execu-
tion analysis within cloud environments. For example, Dean
et al. [14] use kernel level tracing for anomaly detection
in Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) clouds. Their statistical
approach is capable of differentiating between external and
internal anomalies. Additionally, their method identiﬁes the
top most affected system calls to provide fault localization
assistance. Spillner [15] creates trace proﬁles of containers
within cloud environments to measure their memory usage.
This work is meant to help developers avoid ﬁnancial penalties
due to inaccurate memory allocation in cloud computing envi-
ronments. In [16], Zhang et al. collect kernel event traces from
cloud infrastructures. They then employ both data mining and
statistical analysis tools to perform performance issue analysis.
Considering the success seen in these works, tracing methods
are shown to be a viable alternative to the aforementioned
internal monitoring agents.
As the number of containers within a cloud environment
increases, manual analysis becomes tedious and prone to
errors. Consequently, several different works have explored
the use of machine learning algorithms to automate container
behaviour analysis. A survey of different works that explore
the use of machine learning for resource management within
cloud computing is presented by Goodarzy et al. in [17]. In
[18] Ye et al. compare the effectiveness of Linear Regression
(LR), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (ANN) as tools to model the execution behaviour
of containerized applications. In [19], Ye et al. also explore
support vector regression (SVR) as a performance prediction
model of Spark within Docker containers. These techniques
can achieve low prediction error, however they are not ideal
for complex environments made up of a variety of applications.
Machine learning clustering techniques are an effective
alternative for working within varied cloud environments.
Several works have explored the use of these clustering
techniques, including DBSCAN [5], Canopy clustering [4],
k-nearest neighbours (KNN) [20], and k-medoids [4]. Nemati
et al. [21] propose a VM workload characterization using a
two stage K-Means clustering scheme to perform both course
and ﬁne grained workload characterization. They utilize host
system tracing to collect detailed information on the under-
lying behaviour of running VMs. Considering the similarities
between virtual machines and containers, we attempt to apply
K-Means clustering within our own context.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no pre-existing
works
that
conduct
container
workload
characterization
through the analysis of execution states taken from host
system trace data. Through the use of tracing techniques,
our framework is capable of extracting detailed information
regarding container workloads with minimal overhead and
simple deployment.
10
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we explain the methods we use to collect
and interpret the system execution traces. A visual overview
of the proposed pipeline is shown in Figure 1. Firstly, detailed
information regarding each container’s execution is collected
using an open-source tracing tool. Then a ranking algorithm is
utilized to select the most relevant threads of each container.
Data regarding these threads’ execution states is extracted
and vectorized to represent their respective container. Finally,
a two-stage clustering is used to compute coarse and ﬁne-
grained characterizations of the container workloads.
A. Background on Containers
Containers, similarly to virtual machines (VM), are a type of
virtualization technology. Virtualization as a whole is a collec-
tion of software technologies that enables execution on virtual
hardware or operating systems. The main difference between
VMs and containers is each VM requires the installation of
a guest operating system, as shown in Figure 2. Containers
run on the host’s operating system, and thus share its re-
sources. They package all the necessary executables, libraries,
and conﬁguration details into a single unit for lightweight,
efﬁcient deployment of applications. For this reason, many
developers have turned to containers to replace traditional VM
virtualization in cloud environments [22].
Container engines are a type of software that assist users
with container creation and management. There are several dif-
ferent commercial container engines, such as Docker Engine
[23], RKT [24], CRI-O [25], and LXD [26]. A standard con-
tainer engine accepts user input to create container instances
from a ﬁle known as a container image. An engine is then
used to call container runtimes. From a user perspective, a
container engine may appear to handle container execution.
However, from a technical standpoint, it is left to the host to
handle the containerized application. Thus, it is not necessary
to trace the container engine for our analysis.
B. Container Tracing
Linux Trace Toolkit next generation (LTTng) [12] is an
open-source tracing tool used to collect events from multiple
layers. Based on our observations, from a kernel perspective
a process running within a container is no different than a
process running on the host. As this is the case, we can use
the raw kernel events collected by LTTng within our container
analysis.
This uniﬁed tracing of containers is not reliant on internal
access, and accordingly it is not affected by the privacy
restrictions that are often present within cloud environments.
It is also a more manageable alternative to utilizing resource
monitoring agents with a large number of containers. However,
this methodology does present the challenge of determining
which threads are associated with a speciﬁc container. One
solution is to specify certain metadata ﬁelds, commonly re-
ferred to as contexts, to be recorded at each trace event. A
visualization of an event and its contexts is shown in Figure
3. The ﬁrst context required for container aware tracing is
its namespace ID (pid_ns). A container has its own unique
namespace. Therefore this context allows us to group threads
into their respective container or even ﬁlter tracing by a
speciﬁed container. Two other useful contexts are tid and
vtid. The thread ID (tid) is an unique ID on the host,
whereas the virtual thread ID (vtid) is an ID speciﬁc to
the container’s namespace. An example of setting up a tracing
session which includes these contexts and only records a single
container’s events is shown in Figure 4.
C. Execution States
Using the kernel level trace events, we can extract detailed
information on program execution. We accomplish this using
the open-source visualization tool Eclipse Trace Compass [27].
Trace Compass provides several different builtin views to
extract useful information from trace data. An example of
one of these views is shown in Figure 5. The Trace Compass
Scripting plugin also adds scripting capabilities for ﬂexible
data analysis. We utilize JavaScript within this scripting en-
vironment to perform the analyses described in the following
sections.
Based on observations taken from our kernel trace analysis,
we saw that a thread can run in several different states through-
out its execution. A visualization of these kernel execution
states, along with what prompts a state switch, is shown in
Figure 6. Two of these states, which we refer to as “user
mode” and “system call mode”, indicate that the thread is
executing code. Accordingly, we refer to these two states
as “running” states. They differ in the level of privileges
granted to the thread. User mode is associated with user
application code, and thus does not have high level privileges.
Threads executing in system call mode have higher privileges,
and thus are capable of executing kernel functions. We also
consider four “blocking” states, which are distinguishable
by the cause of their blocked status. These execution states
include “preempted”, “interrupted”, “blocked”, and “waiting”.
A thread is said to be in a preempted state when its ready
for execution, but is forced to wait because of a lack of
assignable CPU time slices. This situation could arise when a
higher priority thread is running, or if the current thread has
simply run the duration of its time slice. A thread would enter
an interrupted state when an interrupt request (IRQ) occurs.
Such a thread would remain in this interrupted state while the
interrupt handling is performed. A thread is put into a blocked
state when it must wait for some condition to be met before
it may continue its execution. An example of this is when a
thread must wait for the allocation of additional resources, or
when another thread must complete its tasks. Finally, there
are times when a thread is not active. For instance, this would
be the case if a thread has been created but has not started
execution. In this case, the thread is said to be in a waiting
state.
Certain kernel events can be used to identify context or
changes in thread execution state [28]. For instance, when an
irq_softirq_entry or irq_handler_entry event
occurs, this indicates that the thread has entered an inter-
11
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
(1) Host Trace Collection
(2) Rank Calculation
(3) Data Vectorization
(4a) First Stage Clustering
(4b) Second Stage Clustering
Fig. 1. The proposed pipeline for workload characterization.
Hardware
Host OS
Hypervisor
Guest OS
Bins/Libs
Application
VM
Guest OS
Bins/Libs
Application
VM
Hypervisor-Based
Virualization
Hardware
Host OS
Bins/Libs
Application
Container
Bins/Libs
Application
Container
Container Engine
Container-Based
Virualization
Fig. 2. Comparison between virtual machines and containers.
[11:46:35.255401558] (+0.000011922) context_tracing
syscall_entry_futex: { cpu_id = 0 }, { pid = 2313, vpid =
1, tid = 2379, vtid = 38, pid_ns = 4026532249 }, { }
Fig. 3. A tracing event that includes the pid ns context.
rupted state. It will leave this interrupted state when an
irq_softirq_exit or irq_handler_exit event takes
place. The sched_waking event shows that a thread is ready
for execution should a time slice become available, and as such
this event indicates that the thread is in a preempted state.
The sched_switch event can be indicative of different
state switches depending on the thread’s state prior to the
switch. For example, should some the thread j be in a running
state, then the sched_switch event indicates that j was
replaced by some other thread k. Therefore thread j goes into
a preempted state and thread k enters a running state. The
sched_switch event can similarly identify blocked and
waiting state switches. The pseudocode for using these events
to determine a thread’s execution state is shown in Algorithm
1.
By extracting details pertaining to each thread’s state se-
quence, we can characterize the type of application workload
# Get
p r o c e s s
id
of
the
c o n t a i n e r ’ s
i n i t
p r o c e s s
> pid=$ ( docker
i n s p e c t −−format
’{{. S t a t e .
Pid }} container name )
# Get
the
c o n t a i n e r ’ s
namespace
> namespace=$ ( l s n s −n −t
pid −o NS −p ${
pid })
# Create
t r a c i n g
s e s s i o n
> l t t n g
c r e a t e
session name
# Add n e c e s s a r y
c o n t e x t s
to
t r a c i n g
s e s s i o n
> l t t n g
add −c o n t e x t −k −t
pid ns −t
t i d
−t
v t i d −t
procname −t
pid −t
vpid
# Enable
a l l
s y s c a l l
events
and
f i l t e r
by
c o n t a i n e r ’ s
namespace
> l t t n g
enable −event −k −−s y s c a l l
−a −−
f i l t e r = ‘ ‘\ $ctx . pid ns == ${namespace
} ’ ’
Fig. 4. Arguments to set up a LTTng tracing session set to only collect the
events of a single Docker container.
within a container. For example, if a container’s threads
are frequently entering the blocked state, this is indicative
of I/O intensive operations. Furthermore, if the threads are
rapidly switching into preempted, user mode, and system call
mode states, this is indicative of CPU intensive operations. A
complete list of the metrics we extract from the thread state
sequences is shown in Table I.
D. Thread Ranking Algorithm
A single running container is often made up of several
active threads. The total number of threads varies from case to
case depending on the type of containerized application and
its workload. Based on our observations, even idle containers
may contain multiple threads. For instance, one idle container
containing Apache ZooKeeper still contained thirty threads.
Of these thirty threads, only three exhibited behaviour worth
analyzing. The remaining twenty seven threads remained in
the waiting state throughout the entire tracing session, and thus
were not worth any further consideration. To make meaningful
comparison between containers, we must generate a single
standardized representation. We propose that ﬁrst identifying
12
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 5 ---
Fig. 5. Trace Compass’s Control Flow view.
Inserted into
wait queue
Selected
to run
IRQ handled
IRQ issued
System Call
Mode
User Mode
Running
Interrupted
Preempted
Time slice
expired
Blocked
Wake-up
Container
Container Engine
Start/Stop Container Runtime
Fig. 6. Execution states of active threads.
a container’s top most signiﬁcant threads and then combining
their metrics is an effective solution.
To identify a container’s most signiﬁcant threads, we adapt
the PageRank (PR) algorithm [7]. This algorithm is most
commonly used in web structure mining to ﬁnd pertinent web
pages to a given query. It works by counting both the quantity
and quality of links pointing to each web page. A page which
has many links from highly ranking pages will be given a high
rank. For our purposes, the modiﬁed ranking algorithm utilizes
the inter-thread interactions to compute a thread relevancy
score. The pseudocode for this ranking algorithm is shown
in Algorithm 2.
Inspired by methods presented in [29], we start by creating
a directed graph where each node represents an individual
thread. Directed edges between nodes are then generated to de-
note the interactions between the corresponding threads. Any
Algorithm 1: Blocked Reason Analysis Algorithm
if event == sched waking then
threadstate
j
= preempted;
end
else if event == irq softirq entry or event ==
irq handler entry then
threadstate
j
= interrupted;
end
else if event == sched switch then
prev state = getEventField(event, “prev state”);
if prev state == TASK DEAD or prev state
== WAKEKILL then
threadstate
j
= waiting;
threadstate
k
= threadlast running state
k
;
end
else if prev state ==
TASK INTERRUPTIBLE then
threadstate
j
= blocked;
threadstate
k
= threadlast running state
k
;
end
else if prev state == TASK RUNNING then
threadstate
j
= preempted;
threadstate
k
= threadlast running state
k
;
end
end
else
threadstate
j
= waiting;
end
Algorithm 2: Thread Ranking Algorithm
for event ∈trace do
if event == sched wakeup then
wakerTID = getWakerTID();
wakeeTID = getWakeeTID();
incrementLinkCount(wakerTID);
link(wakeeTID, wakerTID);
end
end
for node ∈graph do
updateRank(node);
end
13
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
TABLE I
METRICS EXTRACTED FROM TRACE DATA
Metric
Description
D priv
Percentage of time performing privileged execution
D non
Percentage of time performing non-privileged execution
W unknown
Percentage of time where wait reason is unknown
W irq
Percentage of time waiting for interrupt handling
W res
Percentage of time waiting for resources
W cpu
Percentage of time waiting for CPU
F priv
Frequency of privileged execution
F non
Frequency of non-privileged execution
F disk
Frequency of wait for resources
F irq
Frequency of interrupt request injection
F prempt
Frequency of preemption
F inactive
Frequency of inactive status
inter-thread dependencies may be used to identify these link-
ages, but in this work we primarily use the sched_wakeup
event. Upon completing this graph, we move on to compute
the rank of each thread. We let the set s consist of all threads
that point to a thread p. Then we let q be a thread within s,
and n be the number of links from q. The rank (R) of p is
computed as:
R(p) =

q∈s
R(q)
n
(1)
In this work, the rank of each node is initially set to
1
t ,
where t is the total number of threads recorded in the trace
data. A simpliﬁed visualization of an execution graph where
the initial ranks are set to 1 is shown in Figure 7. In this
example, Thread A is said to be a very signiﬁcant thread. It
has the greatest number of edges pointing to it, which results in
a higher rank. Thread C and Thread E have the same number
of links pointing to them, however they have different ranks.
This is because a link pointing from Thread F is considered
to be more signiﬁcant as it interacts with fewer threads than
Thread D. As such, Thread E has a higher rank than Thread
C.
E. Vectorization
Most machine learning algorithms expect ﬁxed sized vectors
as input. Consequently, the collected execution trace data’s
raw, semi-structured format is not suitable for this kind of
automated analysis. Thus, the collected performance metrics
we extract must be vectorized in a data preprocessing phase.
In this work, we propose generating a state duration vector
to represent each container. With these duration vectors, there
is an entry for each of the six possible execution states. The
value of each entry represents the total amount of time the
container’s top most relevant threads entered the corresponding
state, i.e:
Ci = (si1, si2, si3, si4, si5, si6)
(2)
We also normalize the input vectors to improve upon the
quality and efﬁciency of comparison. To do this, we utilize
A
R(A) = 1.5
B
R(B) = 1
D
R(D) = 1
C
R(C) = 0.5
F
R(F) = 1
E
R(E) = 1
R(B)
1
R(D)
2
R(D)
2
R(F)
1
Fig. 7. A visualization of ranking threads when the initial ranks were set to
1.
the L2 norm [30]. This results in a set of input vectors with
the same magnitude, i.e.:
M

m=1
f 2
im = 1, ∀i = 1..N
(3)
F. Container Workload Clustering
When selecting the method to group containers based on
their their execution behaviour, two main factors inﬂuenced
our decision. Firstly, the algorithm could not be reliant on
labeled training data. This information may not be readily
available, and it would constrict our approach’s ability to dis-
cover new execution behaviours. As such, supervised machine
learning classiﬁers were not viable options. Secondly, the ap-
proach had to characterize all entries. This meant that popular
clustering algorithms that automatically identify outliers, such
as DBSCAN [31] or OPTICS [32], were not suitable for this
work.
With this in mind, we chose to group the state count vectors
using the popular K-Means clustering algorithm [33]. As an
unsupervised clustering algorithm, this method has the added
advantage of not requiring labeled training data. As such,
the proposed methodology is not conﬁned to user supplied
deﬁnitions. The K-Means algorithm works by identifying k
centroids, which serve as the cluster centers. In our analysis,
a centroid is used as a single representation of the various
workloads found within the cluster. A distance function is
then used to assign each of the entries to their spatially closest
cluster. This is done with the overarching goal of maximizing
the intra-cluster similarity as well as the dissimilarity between
clusters, i.e.:
min
N

i=1
M

k=1
(fik −cjk)2
(4)
14
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 7 ---
Cluster data into
k = 2 and k = 3
groups
Cluster group x into
k = 2, 3, ..., 10
sub-groups
A group has yet to
undergo second
stage clustering
Take results with
best silhouette
score
Take results
with best
silhouette score
Coarse-Grained Characterization
Fine-Grained Characterization
Yes
End
No
Compare results
with first stage
clustering
silhouette score
Fig. 8. Two stage K-Means clustering scheme.
One of the greatest disadvantages of K-Means clustering is
the number of clusters k must be declared beforehand. The
optimal value of clusters may vary widely from case to case,
and as such k should not be set to a static number. It is also not
a value that can be easily determined by the user. To maintain
the automatic nature of our approach, we propose using the
silhouette coefﬁcient (5) to determine the optimal value of
k. This metric measures the similarity of entries within their
own clusters compared to that of other clusters. This results
in a value ranging from -1 to +1, where a high positive value
indicates highly separated clustering. We suggest clustering the
data multiple times with a range of k values and selecting the
results with the highest silhouette score. K-means clustering is
highly efﬁcient, even with a large dataset, and as such repeated
clustering does not signiﬁcantly impact the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.
si =
outi −ini
max(ini, outi)
(5)
We employ a two stage K-Means clustering approach to
provide a more detailed container workload characterization.
This provides coarse-grained characterization at the ﬁrst stage
of clustering, as well as a ﬁner-grained characterization of the
various containers. At the ﬁrst stage of clustering, we apply
K-Means clustering where k equals 2 and 3. The clustering
results with the highest silhouette score are used to provide
a coarse-grained characterization of the container workloads.
While an optimal silhouette score may be found using higher k
Fig. 9. Workload characteristics taken from ﬁrst stage clustering centroids.
values, we limit the number of clusters at this step to maintain
the manageability of our approach. We then cluster each of
the resulting clusters to get the ﬁner-grained characterization
of the container workloads. To do this, we repeatedly apply
K-Means clustering on each of the clusters using k values
ranging from 2 to 10 (inclusive), and take the result with the
highest silhouette score. A visual overview of this process is
shown in Figure 8.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we present the experimental results obtained
with the proposed approach. At each step, we describe the
attributes of the resulting clusters, as well as what an admin-
istrator would be able to gain from the results in a real life
scenario.
A. Experimental Setup
These following experiments were conducted using Ubuntu
20.04.1 with Linux kernel 5.8.0. Each of the containers were
created using Docker 20.10.4. We utilized different bench-
marking tools, such as ApacheBench and Sysbench, to ensure
that a variety of workloads, including network intensive, CPU
intensive, disk I/O intensive, and idle workloads were present
in the test data.
B. First Stage Clustering
The ﬁrst stage of clustering split the containers into three
groups with an overall silhouette score of 0.7945. These
clusters will be referred to as C0, C1, and C2. The normalized
metrics taken from each of the cluster centroids is shown in
Figure 9. When manually looking at the contents of ﬁrst cluster
(C0), we observed that it primarily consisted of containers with
CPU intensive workloads. This is reﬂected in the performance
metrics extracted using the proposed method, as on average
items within this cluster spent 97.3% of their execution time
within running or preempted states. When making a compar-
ison between clusters, on average the items within C0 spent
881.9% more time in these states than those within C1, and
37947.1% more time than the items within C2.
15
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 8 ---
Looking at the entries within the third (C2) cluster revealed
that they mostly consisted of containers that were running
idle. These containers spent signiﬁcantly less time within
active states, and instead spent 73.4% of their execution
time within the waiting state. As the number of containers
rise, it can become increasingly difﬁcult to determine which
are unnecessarily using up resources. In a real scenario, an
administrator may consider stopping the containers within
cluster C2 to release system resources.
The remaining items made up the second (C1) cluster, and
the majority of these containers had network or I/O intensive
workloads. This reﬂected in the extracted metrics as 85.2%
of their execution duration spent within the blocked state. A
breakdown of each cluster’s average execution time in each
state is shown in Table II.
TABLE II
AVERAGE DURATION IN EACH STATE (MS)
State
C0
C1
C2
User Mode
668.72
18.17
1.15
System Call Mode
150.83
29.15
1.06
Blocked
0.00
849.27
6.26
Interrupted
5.55
30.03
0.04
Preempted
140.48
50.45
0.31
Waiting
26.42
19.52
21.47
C. Second Stage Clustering
After observing these coarse-grained results, we applied K-
Means clustering to the three groupings. With this experi-
mental set up, the items in cluster C2 were too similar, and
the overall silhouette score would not improve with further
clustering. This being the case, it remained as one cluster.
Both C0 and C1 were divided into two subgroups, which
will be referred to as clusters C0-0, C0-1, C1-0 and C1-
1. This clustering resulted in an overall silhouette score of
0.6527. Each of these clusters’ average execution time within
the execution states is shown in Table III.
TABLE III
AVERAGE DURATION IN EACH STATE (MS)
State
C0-0
C0-1
C1-0
C1-1
User Mode
800.78
448.62
50.60
8.44
System Call Mode
6.32
391.68
39.48
26.06
Blocked
0.00
0.00
706.06
892.23
Interrupted
5.41
5.79
63.52
19.98
Preempted
174.70
83.46
127.02
27.48
Waiting
0.03
70.41
9.49
22.52
The workload characteristics taken from the centroids of
cluster C0’s subgroups is shown in Figure 10. Entries within
C0 are all containers with CPU intensive workloads that spent
the majority of their execution time within running states.
However, members of the two groups differ in the level
of privileges necessary to perform their assigned operations.
Items within C0-0 spent most of their time executing user
application code, whereas items within C0-1 were performing
Fig. 10.
Workload characteristics discovered from second stage clustering
centroids.
higher level operation. Consequently, on average 46.6% of the
time spent in running states is within system call mode. This
is signiﬁcantly higher than C0-0, which on average spent only
0.78% of it time in running states within system call mode.
We observed that the second stage of clustering split cluster
C1 into network intensive (C1-0) and ﬁle I/O intensive (C1-1)
subgroups. The workload characteristics taken from these two
clusters are shown in Figure 11.
Fig. 11.
Workload characteristics discovered from second stage clustering
centroids.
In summary, the proposed method was able to cluster the
container workloads to generate ﬁve distinct groups based on
their execution behaviour. These clusters consisted of idle
containers, disk I/O intensive workloads, network intensive
workloads, CPU intensive workloads, and privileged CPU
intensive workloads.
Commercial containerization products often accept param-
eters to limit the application’s resource usage. This is to
mitigate the high risk of resource contention. However, it
can be challenging to determine the optimal values for these
parameters, especially with a large number of containers. This
ﬁne-grained clustering stage may be used to characterize the
16
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 9 ---
container workloads, giving administrators a better sense as
to the optimal parameter conﬁgurations for a given cluster.
Administrators might also use these results to identify which
containers are currently suffering from resource contention,
and respond by allocating more of the speciﬁc resources to
the impacted containers.
V. OVERHEAD ANALYSIS
In this section, we discuss the computational overhead
involved with the proposed approach. Speciﬁcally, we examine
the cost of system-level tracing along with data clustering.
A. Tracing
To measure the tracing overhead we considered three dif-
ferent tracing conﬁgurations, including:
• No Tracing: we record the application’s performance
without using system tracing.
• Full Tracing: we perform system tracing with all kernel
tracepoints enabled. This conﬁguration represents the
worst case scenario, and is not necessary for the pro-
posed method. Instead, it is included for the purpose of
comparison.
• Minimal Tracing: we only enable the kernel tracepoints
that are necessary for our proposed method. The required
tracepoints for this conﬁguration are listed in Table IV.
TABLE IV
TRACEPOINTS REQUIRED FOR FEATURE EXTRACTION
Tracepoint
Description
sched_waking
Thread wakes up and resumes a
task
sched_wakeup
Event we use to indicate inter-
process signaling for thread rank-
ing
irq_softirq_entry
Execution of software interrupt
handler begins
irq_softirq_exit
Execution of software interrupt
handler begins
irq_irqhandler_entry
Execution of hardware interrupt
handler begins
irq_irqhandler_exit
Execution of hardware interrupt
handler ends
sched_switch
Thread is scheduled in or out
Table V shows the execution duration of each conﬁguration.
The results were taken from the average of 20 executions
of common command line utilities, and will be used as an
indication of computational overhead. The results show that
tracing all kernel events imposed a 21.6% overhead. This can
be improved by limiting tracing to the events related to our
analysis. With this conﬁguration, tracing only imposes a 3.6%
overhead.
B. Clustering
To test the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the two stage
K-Means clustering approach, we compare its results to that
of two other commonly used clustering methods. Speciﬁcally,
we applied spectral clustering as well as mean shift clustering
TABLE V
DURATION INDICATING TRACING OVERHEAD
Benchmark
Duration (ms)
Overhead
No Tracing
214.85
0.00%
Full Kernel Tracing
261.30
21.62%
Minimal Tracing
222.60
3.61%
to the same data. Spectral clustering, similarly to K-Means
clustering, requires that the number of clusters is declared
prior to execution. Thus, for K-Means and spectral clustering,
we say that one execution entails clustering the data multiple
times to discover the optimal number of clusters. Mean shift
clustering does not require this parameter, so the results of
one execution are taken from clustering the data only once.
The results shown in Table VI are from the average of 10
executions.
TABLE VI
AVERAGE DURATION AND QUALITY OF CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS
Algorithm
Duration (seconds)
Silhouette Score (%)
K-Means Clustering
0.67
95.47
Spectral Clustering
14.68
95.04
Mean Shift Clustering
0.85
95.02
These results indicate that out of the three clustering al-
gorithms, K-Means is the most efﬁcient and effective for
our approach. With a silhouette score of 95.47%, it is an
improvement on score seen with both spectral clustering and
mean shift clustering. On average, it is signiﬁcantly faster
runtime than spectral clustering. Additionally, despite having
to cluster the data multiple times, the K-Means clustering’s
average runtime is 78.34% the average runtime of mean shift
clustering.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The use of containers is becoming increasingly popu-
lar within cloud environments, despite their complex trou-
bleshooting and debugging. The process of monitoring thou-
sands of concurrently running containers could be signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁed by automatically grouping containers based on
workload characterizations. Administrators could use such
methods to deal with issues collectively rather than dealing
with them on an individual basis.
In this paper, we presented a host based workload char-
acterization framework utilizing uniﬁed tracing of containers.
State information from each container’s most relevant threads
is extracted and converted into a single vector representations.
The containers are then clustered using a two stage K-Means
clustering scheme with the silhouette coefﬁcient to determine
the optimal number of clusters. Using experimental results,
we show how this method may be used to identify both idle
and intensive containers on a cloud-scale while imposing only
minimal overhead.
The results of the proposed method may be used to model
resource allocations as well as make optimal conﬁguration
17
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 10 ---
suggestions to administrators, which will be considered in
future work. Future work will also include examining how
different input and tasks may affect clustering. Moreover, we
can improve upon our current technique by extracting other
features from the system trace data. For example, differenti-
ating between different types of interrupts instead of repre-
senting them collectively may give a more in depth picture
of execution. Additionally, future work may consider more
advanced deep learning techniques to characterize container
workloads.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alimudin and Y. Ishida, “Service-based container
deployment
on
Kubernetes
using
stable
marriage
problem,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
2020
The
6th
International Conference on Frontiers of Educational
Technologies,
ser.
ICFET
2020.
New
York,
NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,
p. 164–167. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3404709.3409389
[2] B. Ruan, H. Huang, S. Wu, and H. Jin, “A performance
study of containers in cloud environment,” vol. 10065,
11 2016, pp. 343–356.
[3] “Cloud
native
survey,”
2020.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.cncf.io/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/
CNCF Survey Report 2020.pdf
[4] L. Cai, Y. Qi, W. Wei, and J. Li, “Improving resource us-
ages of containers through auto-tuning container resource
parameters,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 108 530–108 541,
2019.
[5] X. Zhang, F. Meng, and J. Xu, “PerfInsight: A robust
clustering-based abnormal behavior detection system for
large-scale cloud,” in 2018 IEEE 11th International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2018, pp. 896–
899.
[6] P. Ghosh, Q. Nguyen, and B. Krishnamachari, “Container
orchestration for dispersed computing,” in Proceedings
of
the
5th
International
Workshop
on
Container
Technologies and Container Clouds, ser. WOC ’19.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2019, p. 19–24. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3366615.3368354
[7] W. Xing and A. Ghorbani, “Weighted PageRank algo-
rithm,” 01 2004, pp. 305–314.
[8] F. Giraldeau, J. Desfossez, D. Goulet, M. Desnoyers, and
M. R. Dagenais, “Recovering system metrics from kernel
trace,” in Linux Symposium 2011, Jun. 2011.
[9] I. Kohyarnejadfard, M. Shakeri, and D. Aloise, “System
performance
anomaly
detection
using
tracing
data
analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2019 5th International
Conference on Computer and Technology Applications,
ser. ICCTA 2019.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 169–173. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3323933.3324085
[10] C. Biancheri, N. E. Jivan, and M. R. Dagenais, “Mul-
tilayer virtualized systems analysis with kernel tracing,”
in 2016 IEEE 4th International Conference on Future
Internet of Things and Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW),
2016, pp. 1–6.
[11] B. Cornelissen, A. Zaidman, A. Deursen, L. Moonen, and
R. Koschke, “A systematic survey of program compre-
hension through dynamic analysis,” Software Engineer-
ing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 35, pp. 684 – 702, 11
2009.
[12] M. Desnoyers and M. Dagenais, “LTTng: Tracing across
execution layers, from the hypervisor to user-space,” in
Linux Symposium, 2008, p. 101.
[13] L. Prieur-Drevon, R. Beamonte, and M. Dagenais, “R-
sht: a state history tree with r-tree properties for analysis
and visualization of highly parallel system traces,” Jour-
nal of Systems and Software, vol. 135, 09 2017.
[14] D. J. Dean, H. Nguyen, P. Wang, and X. Gu, “Perf-
Compass: Toward runtime performance anomaly fault lo-
calization for infrastructure-as-a-service clouds,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 6th USENIX Conference on Hot Topics
in Cloud Computing, ser. HotCloud’14.
USA: USENIX
Association, 2014, p. 16.
[15] J. Spillner, “Resource management for cloud functions
with memory tracing, proﬁling and autotuning,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 Sixth International Workshop
on Serverless Computing, ser. WoSC’20.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,
p. 13–18. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3429880.3430094
[16] H. Zhang, J. Rhee, N. Arora, S. Gamage, G. Jiang,
K. Yoshihira, and D. Xu, “CLUE: System trace analyt-
ics for cloud service performance diagnosis,” in 2014
IEEE Network Operations and Management Symposium
(NOMS), 2014, pp. 1–9.
[17] S. Goodarzy, M. Nazari, R. Han, E. Keller, and
E. Rozner, “Resource management in cloud computing
using machine learning: A survey,” in 2020 19th IEEE
International Conference on Machine Learning and Ap-
plications (ICMLA), 2020, pp. 811–816.
[18] K. Ye, Y. Kou, C. Lu, Y. Wang, and C.-Z. Xu, “Model-
ing application performance in Docker containers using
machine learning techniques,” 12 2018, pp. 1–6.
[19] K. Ye and Y. Ji, “Performance tuning and modeling
for big data applications in Docker containers,” in 2017
International Conference on Networking, Architecture,
and Storage (NAS), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[20] Z. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, and C. Zhu, “Anomaly
detection for container cluster based on JointCloud
platform,” in Proceedings of the 2019 3rd International
Conference
on
Compute
and
Data
Analysis,
ser.
ICCDA 2019.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 26–30. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3314545.3314567
[21] H. Nemati, S. V. Azhari, and M. R. Dagenais, “Host
hypervisor trace mining for virtual machine workload
characterization,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), 2019, pp. 102–112.
18
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 11 ---
[22] Q. Zhang, L. Liu, C. Pu, Q. Dou, L. Wu, and W. Zhou,
“A comparative study of containers and virtual machines
in big data environment,” 07 2018, pp. 178–185.
[23] “Docker Engine.” [Online]. Available: docker.com
[24] “RKT.” [Online]. Available: https://coreos.com/rkt/
[25] “CRI-O.” [Online]. Available: https://cri-o.io/
[26] “LXD.” [Online]. Available: https://linuxcontainers.org/
lxd/
[27] “Eclipse Trace Compass,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/tools.tracecompass
[28] N.
Ezzati-Jivan,
Q.
Fournier,
M.
Dagenais,
and
A. Hamou-Lhadj, “DepGraph: Localizing performance
bottlenecks in multi-core applications using waiting de-
pendency graphs and software tracing,” 09 2020, pp.
149–159.
[29] J. Wang and N. Ezzati-Jivan, “Enhanced execution trace
abstraction approach using social network analysis meth-
ods,” in 2020 11th Symposium on Software Performance,
Aug 2020.
[30] I. S. Dhillon, Y. Guan, and B. Kulis, “Kernel K-Means:
Spectral clustering and normalized cuts,” in Proceedings
of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD
’04.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery,
2004,
p.
551–556.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1014052.1014118
[31] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-
based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial
databases with noise,” in Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, ser. KDD’96.
AAAI Press, 1996, p.
226–231.
[32] M. Ankerst, M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, and J. Sander,
“Optics: Ordering points to identify the clustering
structure,” in Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data, ser.
SIGMOD ’99.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 1999, p. 49–60. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/304182.304187
[33] J. McQueen, “Some methods for classiﬁcation and anal-
ysis of multivariate observations,” Computer and Chem-
istry, vol. 4, pp. 257–272, 01 1967.
19
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:46:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
