

--- PAGE 1 ---
An End-to-End Framework for Benchmarking
Edge-Cloud Cluster Management Techniques
Philipp Raith, Thomas Rausch, Paul Pr¨uller, Alireza Furutanpey, Schahram Dustdar
Distributed Systems Group, TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
lastname@dsg.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—This paper presents a framework for deﬁning,
performing, and analyzing distributed load testing experiments
for benchmarking edge-cloud clusters. This end-to-end workﬂow
helps researchers build reproducible environments to evaluate
cluster management techniques. Our implementation extends
the open source tool Galileo by adding support for distributed
execution on Kubernetes clusters, additional system monitoring
instruments, as well as out-of-the box experiment workloads.
We focus on providing tools that run across popular CPU
architectures and provide a set of representative workloads,
such as edge AI functions. We demonstrate our framework’s
capabilities in a set of experiments based on use cases commonly
found in edge computing systems research. Additionally, we show
that the resource usage of our system is minimal and that it can
run on resource-constrained devices.
Index Terms—Edge computing, Cloud computing, Benchmark-
ing, Cluster management
I. INTRODUCTION
To evaluate edge-cloud cluster management techniques,
researchers often rely on building testbeds that are tailored
to evaluate the particular technique [1]–[4]. In the absence
of publicly available edge infrastructure, testbeds are, next to
simulations [5] and emulations [6], the only way to evaluate
systems approaches. However, there is currently no gener-
ally accepted way of creating such testbeds or representative
benchmark workloads.This makes it hard for other researchers
to reproduce results and prevents the community from com-
paring works easily. Reproducible experiments for edge-cloud
clusters aid in evaluating cluster management techniques and
include the following steps: (1) setting up the testbed, (2)
generate workload patterns, (3) manage application deploy-
ments, (4) orchestrate experiments, (5) instrumentation and
monitoring, (6) analyze experiment data. Performing these
steps manually is error-prone and impedes reproducibility [7].
An experiment and analytics framework allows researchers to
evaluate their systems approaches while opening up other pos-
sibilities crucial to developing and testing cluster management
techniques. For example, some cluster management techniques
are based on optimizations that rely on historical data [8]. An
experiment framework gathers data in a streamlined way and
signiﬁcantly reduces manual steps and allows scaling in terms
of applications and cluster sizes.
Reducing performance degradation caused by the inter-
ference of co-locating monitoring applications on the same
device is challenging for cloud deployments and more so for
edge-cloud clusters [9] that are typically heterogeneous and
resource-constrained. Hence, we require hardware architecture
agnostic, lightweight and non-intrusive instrumentation tools
to measure resource usage and power consumption. Further,
trace-driven simulations require real-world data to run realistic
simulations [10]. An experiment framework helps record this
data and enables the community to perform complex simula-
tions based on real-world data.
Based on the abovementioned observations and require-
ments, we conclude that such a framework should provide
scalable and reproducible experiments, simple conﬁguration of
workload and applications, ﬁne-grained monitoring telemetry,
storage for analysis data, and standardised analysis techniques.
To this end, we built Galileo [11], a distributed load testing
framework for edge computing environments. However, while
Galileo allows the deﬁnition and execution of experiments,
it cannot operationalize those experiments on existing cluster
testbeds nor provides a streamlined way to instrument and
collect monitoring data from such clusters.
In this paper, we present an end-to-end experiment frame-
work based on an extension of Galileo and the combination of
different components. We motivate our work by introducing
different use cases typically encountered in evaluating cluster
management techniques, demonstrating our framework’s efﬁ-
cacy by executing them, and showcasing the results.
Edge Run1 is a collection of projects aimed to help de-
velopers create, monitor, and test applications for the edge-
cloud continuum. Part of the Edge Run project is Galileo2,
a distributed load testing framework [11]. Galileo can start
clients, generate conﬁgurable requests, and store trace and
telemetry data in a SQL database, which is unﬁt for high
volumes of time-series data. The caveat of Galileo is that it
requires a manual setup and does not offer any kind of integra-
tion with modern orchestration services such as Kubernetes.
In this work, we introduce a framework that extends Galileo,
solves these issues and provides an analytic framework that
completes the end-to-end framework. Further, we introduce
introduce components mimicking the characteristics of edge-
cloud clusters.
1https://github.com/edgerun
2https://github.com/edgerun/galileo
22
2022 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E)
978-1-6654-9115-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IC2E55432.2022.00010
2022 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E) | 978-1-6654-9115-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IC2E55432.2022.00010
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
Speciﬁcally, our contributions are as follows:
• An end-to-end experiment and analytics framework using
a container orchestration service based on Galileo.
• An open-source repository of benchmark applications that
can be used within our framework.
To evaluate and demonstrate the end-to-end process, we
conduct experiments based on representative use cases.
II. GALILEO EXPERIMENTS
This section describes the aim of our framework based on
the experiments and applications we intend to support and the
characteristics of edge-cloud clusters.
A. Aim of the framework
The framework aims to provide tools to perform bench-
marks on edge-cloud compute clusters. Benchmarks aim to
proﬁle single devices or evaluate cluster management tech-
niques in scenario experiments. The edge-cloud continuum
deploys different types of hardware; therefore, all framework
components must run on various hardware architectures. Com-
ponents are tailored to run from resource-constrained devices
to off-the-shelf Virtual Machines hosted in the cloud. Particu-
larly monitoring components should not interfere with running
applications and cause minimal overhead. Additionally, the
framework uses a container orchestration service to automate
the deployment of components and execution of experiments.
Lastly, an integrated monitoring strategy is necessary to
provide tools for analyzing cluster management techniques.
Based on the collected monitoring data, the framework offers
features to analyze experiments. It supports commonly ob-
served key performance indicators (i.e., resource usage, CPU
consumption, scheduling behavior) out-of-the-box. We present
and evaluate in Section IV-B use cases that include these
indicators. To summarise, our end-to-end framework aims to
support users in performing experiments from the deployment
to analyzing them.
B. Galileo
Galileo [11] was created to develop and evaluate cluster
management techniques using Symmetry, a custom cluster
management system. Galileo’s main tasks are to coordinate
clients to generate requests as well as monitor and store
monitoring data in a MySQL instance.
Based on the description of our view of a modern end-
to-end experiment and analytics framework, Galileo requires
adaptions and extensions. Speciﬁcally, we intend the inte-
gration into a modern container orchestration service such
as Kubernetes. This allows us to deploy framework com-
ponents into the cluster, reducing manual steps required to
run experiments. Further, we provide a representative set of
ready-to-deploy applications (i.e., AI inference functions) to
the community for evaluation purposes and as examples for
creating custom applications. Additionally, we add to the SQL-
based data storage the time-series database InﬂuxDBv23. The
3https://www.inﬂuxdata.com/
SQL storage stores experiment metadata (i.e., start, end) and
data gathered during runtime is stored in InﬂuxDB. The ﬁne-
grained monitoring tool, telemd, has also been extended since
its ﬁrst release and now supports Kubernetes pods as well as
the recently released Pressure Stall Information (PSI)4. PSI is
available for CPU, I/O, and network. It shows the time some
or all processes have been waiting for a speciﬁc resource. We
believe using these new metrics can lead to many novel cluster
management techniques.
C. Experiments
The experimentation and analytic framework offer a stream-
lined approach for executing and measuring benchmarks. We
consider two types of experiments in this paper: scenario and
proﬁling.
Scenario experiments are complex scenarios to perform
resource management actions (i.e., scaling). These experiments
allow users to specify multiple application instances on nodes.
Request generation is based on workload proﬁles that Galileo
clients execute.
Proﬁling experiments are similar to scenarios but offer
reduced functionality and concentrate on executing one type
of application on one node. Proﬁling experiments aim to
rapidly test new applications to estimate resource usage and
performance across devices.
D. Applications
Our framework supports any containerized application
which exposes an HTTP endpoint. Though, our primary focus
while developing it was using OpenFaaS5 based functions on
different hardware. Therefore, we offer ready-to-use functions
that support all common architectures (i.e,. amd64, arm64v8
and arm32v7). The functions use the OpenFaaS watchdog6,
which uses a Go-based proxy and calls an internal Python
Flask web server to invoke the function. At the time of writing,
our function repository7 primarily consists of AI inference
functions. For example, the functions can perform object
detection (i.e., gun, human, mask), object classiﬁcation, and
pose estimation.
Custom applications require implementing methods to call
the relevant service and a Kubernetes Pod factory for the
container image. This guarantees ﬂexibility concerning future
applications and requires minimal coding efforts. Section III-C
presents details about the individual projects.
E. Edge-cloud testbeds
To ensure the reproducibility of experiments, we require
tools for setting up testbeds. However, our vision of an
edge-cloud system consists of multiple heterogeneous inter-
connected clusters with varying and adverse network condi-
tions. Consequently, we cannot rely on existing work on cloud
testbeds characterized by relative homogeneity of resources
4https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/accounting/psi.html
5https://docs.openfaas.com/
6https://github.com/openfaas/of-watchdog
7https://github.com/edgerun/galileo-experiments-functions
23
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
Backhaul
Load Balancer 
Fig. 1: Edge-cloud system consisting of multiple clusters
and static and optimal network conditions. Figure 1 depicts
such an edge-cloud system with multiple clusters, where each
is assigned a load balancer.
Cluster management techniques must consider user mo-
bility since it is an important characteristic of edge-cloud
systems [12]. For example, clients move around the city and
connect to radio towers, which act as the ﬁrst entry point. Each
load balancer can redirect requests to other clusters. Internet
backhauls inter-connect all clusters but introduce signiﬁcant
network latency [13]. Our architecture is comparable to works
presented in [1] and [2], which evaluate cluster management
techniques in geo-distributed systems using public cloud offer-
ings. As mentioned, we use a container orchestration service to
set up the cluster. Thus, we create deployment ﬁles that must
be applied to the cluster once. This includes clients, monitoring
agents as well as load balancers, enabling users to set up our
framework on their testbed. Network latency is emulated via
linux tools and mimics the behavior of geo-distributed edge-
cloud clusters. Reproducibility is guaranteed through the usage
of linux tools and an orchestration service.
III. SYSTEM
This section introduces our experimentation framework by
describing the system architecture, explaining the experiment
workﬂow, highlighting important implementation details, and
presenting the testbed used to demonstrate our framework.
A. Architecture
The architecture facilitates generating requests, hosting ap-
plications, distributing messages, and storing data. We use
the lightweight edge-oriented K3s8 Kubernetes distribution
to host applications and clients. All nodes join the same
cluster; while not intuitive at ﬁrst, considering we want to
create a testbed with multiple clusters, it avoids the overhead
of setting up a cluster federation. We use labels to tag
controllers, client nodes, and workers, which assign each node
cluster. Each cluster has one controller node acting as a load
balancer. WireGuard [14], a lean VPN, is used to form a
homogeneous network and tc9, the Linux network shaping
8https://k3s.io/
9https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/tc.8.html
Client
(galileo) 
Client
(galileo)
Client
(galileo)
Controller
(Load
Balancer) 
Worker
Node 
Worker
Node 
Worker
Node 
Worker
Node 
Worker
Node 
Worker
Node 
etcd
Redis
InfluxDB
MariaDB
Galileo
Shell 
round-robin
weights 
traces
telemetry
store data 
subscribe
to data 
telemd
telemd
telemd
telemd
telemd
telemd
Fig. 2: A high level overview of the experiment setup
tool, to introduce latency between clusters. Section IV-C
presents more details about the testbed setup. Figure 2 depicts
the described system. Workers host applications, while client
nodes run Galileo and wait for workload generation requests
published via Redis. Clients send HTTP requests to the load
balancer, which forwards them to application instances. The
controller hosts the load balancer instance. We provide a Go-
based load balancer (go-load-balancer) which implements a
weighted round-robin based load balancing strategy. Though,
users can choose to use any other L7-layer load balancer (i.e.,
Traeﬁk10). Our experimentation framework sets initial weights
for load balancers. Users can modify weights via etcd11, a key-
value storage used by Kubernetes to store state. Each load
balancer instance watches the etcd instance for changes and
updates its internal weights accordingly. The galileo shell is
the component that initiates the experiment and subscribes to
Redis, and stores data in InﬂuxDB and MariaDB for post-
experiment analysis.
B. Experiment workﬂow
In the following, we explain how users can deﬁne and run
experiments. Figure 3 splits the experiment into three phases:
pre-experiment, runtime, and post-experiment. Users only have
to interact during the pre and post-experiment phases, while
our framework handles the system during the runtime phase.
Users have to supply the following input: workload (i.e., a
list of inter-arrival times), applications (i.e., container image),
clients (i.e., implement a method to create the HTTP request),
nodes (i.e., the testbed to perform experiments on). In the
pre-experiment phase, users can generate workloads. The
framework supports two types of workloads: parameterized
and proﬁle-based. The parameterized approach requires three
arguments: n the number of requests, ia the inter-arrival time,
and the number of clients. Clients are asynchronous and send
n requests with a ﬁxed inter-arrival time ia. Consequently,
experiments will stop without waiting for responses. The
10https://traeﬁk.io/
11https://etcd.io/
24
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
Workload
Generation
Applications
(container
images) 
Clients
(how to call
and deploy
service) 
Nodes
(host
applications) 
Galileo
Experiments
Kubernetes
Redis
InfluxDB
MariaDB
Jupyter
Notebooks
(galileo-
jupyter) 
Pre-experiment
(user defined) 
Runtime
(handled by the framework) 
Post-experiment
Analysis 
Fig. 3: Experiment workﬂow
proﬁle-based variant expects an array that contains inter-
arrival times, each array representing one client. For example,
[0.5, 1, 0.5] will send three requests: one after 0.5 seconds,
another one after 1 second, and the last after another 0.5
seconds.
Proﬁling and scenario experiments, as described in Sec-
tion III-B, have different parameters. The former takes both
types of workload, while the latter only supports the proﬁle-
based approach. Additionally, proﬁling experiments take the
application container image, the number of application in-
stances, the host to proﬁle, and in which cluster clients gener-
ate requests. In scenario experiments, users create a mapping
between nodes and container images, including the number
of instances. Further, scenario experiments can start clients
in different clusters, making it possible to deﬁne complex
scenarios (i.e., migrating users from one to another cluster).
After, users start the framework and enter the runtime. The
framework sets up load balancers, spawns applications, conﬁg-
ures clients, and starts the galileo shell to record all telemetry
and trace data. Finally, in the post-experiment phase, users
can analyze the results using galileo-jupyter. We categorize
Load Balancer
tstart
tend
Go Watchdog
forward 
Python Flask
HTTP
Workers
Go Watchdog
return 
Network Latency
t0
t1
t2
Fig. 4: A detailed look into traces
analytics data into three main categories: metadata, traces,
and resource usage. Metadata consists of an experiment ID,
the creator, start and end. Additionally, the framework also
saves information about all nodes. This includes information
detailed in the telemd repository and Kubernetes labels of
each node and their allocatable resources. Figure 4 provides
a detailed description of one trace. We record: the time the
trace was created, the client sent it (tstart), it was forwarded
from the load balancer (t0), it was received by the function
t1, returned t2 and arrived back at the client tend. Based
on these timestamps, we can calculate and estimate further
measures: round-trip-time (RTT, tend−tstart), network latency
between client and load balancer (t0−t1), the network latency
between load balancer and application instance (t1 −t0) and
the execution time (t2 −t1). The execution time includes any
queuing caused by the static number of worker threads the
Python Flask server employs to handle requests. Functions
can return the function execution time in the response body.
Telemetry data consists of node-based resource usage (i.e.,
CPU usage) and per container (i.e., CPU time). We refer
readers to look up the project’s homepage for an exhaustive
list of monitored resources12.
In scenario experiments, users must deploy their own cluster
management techniques. They can create and teardown Pods
via the Kubernetes API, and the telemd-kubernetes-adapter
publishes these events, as well as telemd will monitor newly
created Pods. Further, if our go-load-balancer is used, users
must update weights manually to include new or deleted
applications.
C. Implementation
Our projects mainly use Python. Only the load balancer, a
Kubernetes adapter, and the monitoring agent are written in
Go. All projects are open source and available in the Edge
Run project. In the following, we want to give a high-level
overview of the different repositories and their functionality.
Galileo does two things: start clients and record experiment
data. It offers the essential working tools but is not automated.
Users must deploy an experiment setup manually.
Galileo Experiments contains code that invokes galileo to
start and record experiments. It also includes deployment ﬁles
for necessary components and describes in detail which other
services are required to start an experiment.
Galileo Experiments Extensions provides client implementa-
tions for our functions and serves as entrypoint for experiment
execution.
Galileo Experiments Functions contains OpenFaaS based
functions that can be deployed and benchmarked using clients
implemented in the Extensions project.
Galileo Jupyter contains gateways that allow users to easily
access data recorded during the experiments. Speciﬁcally the
K3sGateway is implemented to analyze Galileo experiments.
The galileo-jupyter project internally uses galileo-db to access
the data storages. Both projects have been extended to support
InﬂuxDB.
The Request Generator project provides functions to gen-
erate workload proﬁles that can be used in the experiments.
Go Load Balancer is a weighted round robin Load Balancer
which watches etcd for weight changes. It sets HTTP headers
to later analyze the path each request has taken to ﬁnally arrive
at an application instance.
Telemd is used as a lightweight push-based ﬁne-grained
monitoring agent and supports resource monitoring on node
12https://github.com/edgerun/telemd/
25
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 5 ---
and application level. Users can set the interval for each
resource separately.
The framework automatically deploys the Telemd Kuber-
netes Adapter which watches Kubernetes Pods using the
ofﬁcial Go Kubernetes client. Any Pod lifecycle event is
reported via Redis and gets recorded during experiments. This
allows users to analyze scale events and associate telemetry
with Pods.
IV. DEMONSTRATION
This section describes possible use cases to motivate our
framework and we evaluate in Section IV-B. Afterwards, we
present our applications used to evaluate selected use cases to
show the results of framework on our testbed.
A. Use cases
Proﬁling experiments can be used to gather performance
measures and resource usage to help developers better under-
stand application implementations and estimate how well a
deployment might perform [7]. Especially in heterogeneous
environments, with resource-constrained devices and modern
hardware accelerators, it is essential to understand hardware
and applications [15]. Another use case for a proﬁling ex-
periment is the measurement of performance interference
due to multi-tenancy [9]. The scenario experiments differ in
conﬁguration capabilities and let users deﬁne a range of initial
application instances and their location. The framework does
not offer any support for cluster management techniques, and
users must start schedulers or scalers that interact with the
cluster. Nevertheless, during the experiment, any changes to
the clusters are recorded, meaning that users can perform
cluster management actions during runtime and use our frame-
work to analyze the experiments. For example, an analytics
technique is to display when and where application instances
have been created and shut down [1].
B. Applications
We are deploying an OpenFaaS-based function, which
serves the Mobilenet neural network [16] using TFLite in
CPU mode. TFLite is a version of Tensorﬂow tailored towards
resource-constrained devices. The function performs object
classiﬁcation on base64-encoded images. The function, as
well as the galileo experiment client application, are available
on Github. You can ﬁnd the code for the demonstration on
Github13 as well. We also include an evaluation of resource
usage of telemd, our monitoring agent, the only experiment
component running on end-devices (except for kubelet).
C. Testbed
Table I displays a selection of devices in the testbed. NX,
TX2 and Nano are all Nvidia Jetson devices14. There are three
clusters in total: IoT Box, Cloudlet and Cloud. The edge-based
clusters are derived from [17].
TABLE I: Testbed
Device
Arch
CPU
Memory
Cluster
1x AsRock
x86
8x Ryzen @ 2 GHz
33GB
IoT Box
1x RPI 4
arm32v7
4x Cortex @ 1.5 GHz
1 GB
IoT Box
1x NX
arm64v8
4x Cortex @ 2 Ghz
8 GB
IoT Box
1x TX2
arm64v8
4x Cortex @ 2 Ghz
8 GB
IoT Box
1x Nano
arm64v8
4x Cortex @ 1.4 GHz
4 GB
IoT Box
1x Xeon
x86
4x Xeon @ 4.6GHz
16 GB
Cloudlet
4x VM
x86
4x vCPU @ 2Ghz
8 GB
Cloud
2x NUC
x86
4x i5 @ 2.2 GHz
16 GB
Clients
Fig. 5: Proﬁling results of the Mobilenet function
D. Experiments
1) Proﬁling experiment: The proﬁling experiment aims
to evaluate performance and resource usage across devices.
One client sends 100 requests with an inter-arrival time of
one second. We execute the experiment on four devices:
Xeon, NX, TX2 and Nano. Figure 5 shows the milli cores
used by the container, the RTT in ms, and the memory usage
in megabytes for each device. The error bars indicate the
95th mean conﬁdence interval. While NX and TX2 have
comparable performance, the Xeon node has the lowest RTT.
The Nano performs worse, and outliers are as long as 6
seconds. A milli core value of 1000 equals one fully utilized
CPU core. The Nano performs again the worst and has the
highest CPU usage. Interestingly, the Xeon device has the
highest memory usage, while the Nano has the lowest. It is
out of scope to further discuss the results as we only intend
to demonstrate possible use cases for our experimentation and
analytics framework. The galileo-jupyter project offers many
convenience
functions
(i.e,.
preprocessed_traces,
preprocessed_telemetry)
that
enable
developers
to plot this chart based on the results (i.e., with Jupyter
Notebooks15).
2) Scenario: We now turn to the scenario experiment.
Speciﬁcally, we start three clients spawning 60 requests with
an inter-arrival time of 1 second. Two clients are situated
in the IoT-Box cluster and one in the Cloudlet cluster. We
also start a Python program that randomly scales up and
down in an interval of 5 seconds. With a probability of
10% it does nothing, with 40% it starts one new function
13https://github.com/edgerun/galileo-experiments-tdis-2022
14https://www.nvidia.com/en-gb/autonomous-machines/embedded-systems/
15https://jupyter.org/
26
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
instance, and with 50% it tears one instance down. All load
balancers distributed requests in a round-robin fashion for this
experiment (i.e., from Cloudlet to Cloud). Figure 6 shows how
many function replicas have been running across the clus-
ter. This plot illustrates the behavior of cluster management
techniques and analyzing it serves as an essential task during
development. Further, our framework enables users to analyze
where requests have been generated and where they have been
processed. To sum up, our framework can perform experiments
that allow requests to be processed across the edge-cloud
continuum and offers functionality to analyze them. As before,
galileo-jupyter exposes convenience functions to support users
in developing and testing cluster management techniques (i.e.,
get_replica_schedule_statistics).
Fig. 6: Function replicas running across clusters
3) Telemd evaluation: To conclude this section, we show
our monitoring agent’s resource usage while it emits resource
metrics every second. Figure 7 displays results recorded during
a 100-second experiment. The ﬁgure shows the relative con-
tainer CPU usage of telemd. 100% CPU usage means that the
container (i.e., telemd) fully utilized all cores of the device.
Figure 7 also shows the memory usage in megabytes. Both
results show that resource usage is relatively low on all tested
devices, ranging from a Raspberry Pi 4 to a Xeon-based PC.
Users can set a different monitoring interval for each resource
to reduce resource usage further.
Fig. 7: Resource usage of telemd
V. RELATED WORK
Works have been published that provide applications (i.e.,
functions) to evaluate systems but do not propose an end-
to-end framework [18]. We can use these functions with our
framework if they expose an HTTP endpoint. Grambow et al.
[19] present a benchmarking framework for FaaS platforms.
They focus on supporting public FaaS offerings while we
present a framework for edge-cloud testbeds. Gao et al. [20]
present LinkLab, a scalable IoT testbed that supports experi-
mentation and remote development. In contrast to their work,
our framework aims to support users in evaluating cluster
management techniques and proﬁling applications, while theirs
focuses on developing and evaluating IoT applications. Yang
et al. [21] present EdgeTB, a hybrid testbed to evaluate
distributed machine learning applications at the edge. EdgeTB
combines emulated nodes with real ones to create a high-
ﬁdelity and large-scale evaluation. In contrast to our work,
their framework is for AI training, while ours is ﬂexible
regarding applications. Das et al. [22] present a benchmark
suite to evaluate commercial edge computing platforms. To
summarize, many approaches exist that build benchmarks for
FaaS or edge-cloud computing, but we speciﬁcally aim to
support the development of cluster management techniques.
VI. FUTURE WORK
The testbed conﬁguration (i.e., labeling the nodes) is not
yet fully automatic and conﬁguring network latency between
clusters has to be done manually. For future work, we plan
on extending Ether, Edge Run’s topology synthesizer [17], to
model the real-world testbed as code and perform conﬁgu-
rations (i.e., WireGuard) as well as set the network latency
between them. Another extension we are working on right
now is adding power measurements and using them to train
models that can predict energy consumption based on resource
usage. Using our framework, we can fully automate and
perform different experiments to gather enough data to train
our models.
VII. CONCLUSION
Evaluating edge computing systems is challenging given
both the nascence of the ﬁeld, as well as the heterogeneity
of infrastructure such systems operate on. Benchmarks and
testbeds used to evaluate cluster management techniques are
often tailored to the speciﬁc technique, making it difﬁcult to
reproduce them and therefore compare approaches. We extend
Galileo, a system for distributed load testing that enables users
to deﬁne and run reproducible benchmarks. Galileo lacks tools
to operationalize experiments, users must manually deploy
other tools to scale workers, instrument their testbed and
collect data. We extend Galileo to use Kubernetes to deploy
runtime components, and extend and create tools to offer an
end-to-end experiment and analytics framework for edge-cloud
clusters. Future work includes a code based approach to deﬁne
testbeds and dynamically create different cluster setups with
varying network latency.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Alexander Knoll for supporting us in setting up
the hardware infrastructure, and Jacob Palecek for the code
contributions.
27
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 7 ---
REFERENCES
[1] F. Rossi, V. Cardellini, F. L. Presti, and M. Nardelli, “Geo-distributed
efﬁcient deployment of containers with kubernetes,” Computer Commu-
nications, vol. 159, pp. 161–174, 2020.
[2] M. A. Tamiru, G. Pierre, J. Tordsson, and E. Elmroth, “mck8s: An
orchestration platform for geo-distributed multi-cluster environments,”
in 2021 International Conference on Computer Communications and
Networks (ICCCN).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[3] B. Shayesteh, C. Fu, A. Ebrahimzadeh, and R. Glitho, “Auto-adaptive
fault prediction system for edge cloud environments in the presence
of concept drift,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cloud
Engineering (IC2E).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 217–223.
[4] V. Kjorveziroski and S. Filiposka, “Kubernetes distributions for the edge:
serverless performance evaluation,” The Journal of Supercomputing, pp.
1–28, 2022.
[5] K. Alwasel, D. N. Jha, F. Habeeb, U. Demirbaga, O. Rana, T. Baker,
S. Dustdar, M. Villari, P. James, E. Solaiman et al., “Iotsim-osmosis: A
framework for modeling and simulating iot applications over an edge-
cloud continuum,” Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 116, p. 101956,
2021.
[6] R. Mayer, L. Graser, H. Gupta, E. Saurez, and U. Ramachandran, “Emu-
fog: Extensible and scalable emulation of large-scale fog computing
infrastructures,” in 2017 IEEE Fog World Congress (FWC).
IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[7] D. N. Jha, M. Nee, Z. Wen, A. Zomaya, and R. Ranjan, “Smartdbo:
smart docker benchmarking orchestrator for web-application,” in The
World Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3555–3559.
[8] T. Rausch, A. Rashed, and S. Dustdar, “Optimized container schedul-
ing for data-intensive serverless edge computing,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 114, pp. 259–271, 2021.
[9] D. N. Jha, S. Garg, P. P. Jayaraman, R. Buyya, Z. Li, and R. Ranjan, “A
holistic evaluation of docker containers for interfering microservices,”
in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing (SCC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 33–40.
[10] T. Rausch, W. Hummer, and V. Muthusamy, “Pipesim: Trace-driven
simulation of large-scale ai operations platforms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.12587, 2020.
[11] T. Rausch, P. Raith, P. Pillai, and S. Dustdar, “A system for operating
energy-aware cloudlets,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE Sympo-
sium on Edge Computing, 2019, pp. 307–309.
[12] T. Ouyang, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Follow me at the edge: Mobility-
aware dynamic service placement for mobile edge computing,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 2333–
2345, 2018.
[13] T. Braud, Z. Pengyuan, J. Kangasharju, and H. Pan, “Multipath com-
putation ofﬂoading for mobile augmented reality,” in 2020 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
(PerCom).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–10.
[14] J. A. Donenfeld, “Wireguard: next generation kernel network tunnel.”
in NDSS, 2017, pp. 1–12.
[15] S. P. Baller, A. Jindal, M. Chadha, and M. Gerndt, “Deepedgebench:
Benchmarking deep neural networks on edge devices,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E).
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 20–30.
[16] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang,
T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, “Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convo-
lutional neural networks for mobile vision applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
[17] T. Rausch, C. Lachner, P. A. Frangoudis, P. Raith, and S. Dustdar,
“Synthesizing plausible infrastructure conﬁgurations for evaluating edge
computing systems,” in 3rd USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Edge
Computing (HotEdge 20), 2020.
[18] J. Kim and K. Lee, “Functionbench: A suite of workloads for serverless
cloud function service,” in 2019 IEEE 12th International Conference on
Cloud Computing (CLOUD).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 502–504.
[19] M. Grambow, T. Pfandzelter, L. Burchard, C. Schubert, M. Zhao, and
D. Bermbach, “Befaas: An application-centric benchmarking framework
for faas platforms,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cloud
Engineering (IC2E).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[20] Y. Gao, J. Zhang, G. Guan, and W. Dong, “Linklab: A scalable and
heterogeneous testbed for remotely developing and experimenting iot
applications,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM Fifth International Conference on
Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 176–188.
[21] L. Yang, F. Wen, J. Cao, and Z. Wang, “Edgetb: A hybrid testbed
for distributed machine learning at the edge with high ﬁdelity,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 33, no. 10, pp.
2540–2553, 2022.
[22] A. Das, S. Patterson, and M. Wittie, “Edgebench: Benchmarking edge
computing platforms,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Utility and Cloud Computing Companion (UCC Companion).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 175–180.
28
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:35:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
