

--- PAGE 1 ---
This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Ramachandran, Gowri, McDonald, Lewyn, & Jurdak, Raja
(2023)
FUSE: Fault Diagnosis and Suppression with eBPF for Microservices.
In Monti, Flavia, Rinderle-Ma, Stefanie, Ruiz Cortés, Antonio, Zheng,
Zibin, & Mecella, Massimo (Eds.) Service-Oriented Computing: 21st Inter-
national Conference, ICSOC 2023, Rome, Italy, November 28 – December
1, 2023, Proceedings, Part I.
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 243–257.
This ﬁle was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/243145/
c⃝2023 The Author(s)
This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the docu-
ment is available under a Creative Commons License (or other speciﬁed license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recog-
nise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au
License: Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0
Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identiﬁed by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-48421-6_17



--- PAGE 2 ---
FUSE: Fault Diagnosis and Suppression with eBPF
for Microservices
Gowri Sankar Ramachandran, Lewyn McDonald, and Raja Jurdak
Trusted Networks Lab
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
Abstract. Modern applications use microservices architecture due to its
scalability, loose coupling, and abstraction benefits. Following this architec-
ture, large applications get divided into small and composable services with
API communication support and hosted on the cloud. The deployment of
services on the cloud offers elastic load balancing, cost efficiency, and ease of
management, but this deployment model introduces two problems; firstly, the
service owner must trust third-party cloud providers to run services, all while
tolerating potential faults. Secondly, the service owner cannot reliably diag-
nose runtime faults with generic and coarse-grained logs offered by the cloud
infrastructure. Having the ability to deeply introspect microservices’ runtime
behaviour on a third-party cloud infrastructure would provide opportunities
to improve the resiliency of cloud-native microservice-based applications sig-
nificantly.
This paper introduces FUSE, a novel framework based on extended Berkeley
Packet Filter (eBPF) technology that addresses these challenges by enabling
deep introspection of microservices’ runtime behaviour. FUSE observes mi-
croservices’ runtime behaviour at the kernel level by tracing the system calls,
function invocations, and disk accesses. Subsequently, it creates a unique
hash-based digest from the traces for each microservice invocation. FUSE
then uses the digest to verify the microservice’s runtime correctness. A cor-
rect microservice repeatedly produces a known and deterministic digest, while
a faulty service generates a random and unknown trace. Moreover, FUSE of-
fers a real-time fault detection and suppression capability to microservices
architecture and prevents cascading failures promptly. Lastly, FUSE intro-
duces a stability score for microservices to capture their runtime consistencies
succinctly. During evaluation using four representative microservices on AWS
EC2 instances, FUSE successfully detected 84 runtime faults.
Keywords: eBPF · Resilient Microservice · Fault Diagnosis.
1
Introduction
Contemporary applications adopt microservices architecture to achieve scalability,
load balancing, continuous integration and loose coupling for large-scale enterprise
applications [7]. Some of the largest tech companies, including Amazon [8] and Mi-
crosoft [12], serve millions of customers following microservices architecture. The
emergence of cloud computing platforms further accelerates the growth of microser-
vices, allowing the service owners to deploy their applications on the cloud without



--- PAGE 3 ---
needing to invest in hardware, software, and tooling resources, as existing cloud
platforms offer many built-in services, including elastic load balancing, security, and
remote management, for an affordable cost, making them attractive for the deploy-
ment of microservices [21].
As the applications switch from the “monolithic” to the “microservices” model,
the end system consists of a set of independent services running on different cloud
instances in a virtualised environment. Although cloud providers strive to provide
reliable services to the service owners, there is still a possibility of service failures and
faults at runtime [1, 6, 5]. Service meshes have been developed to make microservices
resilient against communication failures, as the failure of a single service could impact
other inter-connected services through the cascading effect [11]. Figure 1 (left) shows
how a single faulty service can disrupt other interconnected services due to fault
propagation. Sidecars monitor individual services and relay the information to the
service mesh control plane to make dynamic decisions at runtime. Existing features
of sidecars include traffic monitoring, load balancing, and fault-tolerant networking,
but there is no support to deeply observe the “execution” of microservice at runtime
to ensure consistency [4, 14].
Existing literature highlights the benefits of observing microservices at the kernel
level using the extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF) [4, 22, 13, 3, 18, 10]. eBPF of-
fers a rich set of functionalities to monitor the runtime behaviour of microservices. It
enables the service owners to develop kernel probes, which are user-defined programs
with kernel privileges to deeply introspect the behaviour of applications running in
the user space. eBPF provides several functionalities, including support for network
observation, disk monitoring, and system call tracing to get fine-grained activity logs
of user-level programs such as microservices. Extant literature proposes eBPF-based
frameworks to classify microservices in data centres[3, 4] and for monitoring network
and performance [22, 13, 18], lacking a solution to detect and suppress runtime faults
in microservice-based applications, which is the focus of this work.
Fig. 1. Composing Microservices using FUSE to suppress fault.
This paper introduces FUSE, an eBPF-based fault-diagnosis and suppression
framework for microservices architecture. FUSE differs from other works in the fol-
lowing ways:



--- PAGE 4 ---
– FUSE observes the runtime behaviour of microservices by monitoring system
calls, function invocations, and disk accesses, including memory allocations, to
create a unique signature (or digest) from traces for each invocation.
– FUSE categories microservices as strictly or partially idempotent service based
on the signature.
– FUSE detects runtime faults by checking the signature of each invocation against
the expected signatures. Upon fault detection, it promptly alerts the service
administrator and the circuit-breaker to suppress cascading failures, as shown
in Figure 1 (right).
– FUSE also helps the service owners and developers quantify the runtime con-
sistency of microservices through a novel stability score for microservices. A
microservice composition with a low stability score is good for resiliency.
FUSE is implemented in a Linux environment with eBPF and evaluated AWS
EC2 instances running the Ubuntu operating system. The performance and effective-
ness of FUSE are validated using four representative microservices that 1) register
a user into a MySQL database, 2) query the system to retrieve the list of users,
3) test the strength of a password, and 4) add the numbers in a list. During the
evaluation, FUSE successfully detected 84 runtime faults, highlighting its ability
to prevent cascading failures by alerting service administrators and circuit break-
ers. Lastly, the stability score is a valuable feature for service administrators and
software developers to improve the microservices’ resiliency.
2
Background
2.1
extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF)
The extended Berkeley Packet Filter, commonly known as eBPF, is a special type
of virtual machine within the Linux kernel [15]. It was introduced in 1992 with
a register-based filter for evaluating the network packets deep inside the kernel.
tcpdump is one of the popular tools from the eBPF family. Although network mon-
itoring is one of the popular use cases of eBPF, it does provide multiple hooks to
trace and monitor various subsystems inside the Linux kernel. Some of the other
hooks include Filetop (for tracking the file reads and writes), Opensnoop (attempts
to track the files accessed by a specific process), and syscount (counts the number of
system calls) [9]. The user-level programs can attach to these kernel hooks through
eBPF probes such as kprobe, uprobe, tracepoint, and socket [9]. Depending on the
type of selected hooks, the probes deliver detailed information to the user for deep
introspection of application activities, including microservices.
2.2
Faults in Microservices
Microservices use a software framework such as Apache and Spring and run on a
hardware infrastructure provided by the cloud provider in the case of cloud-native
deployments. As discussed in [1], the microservices could be exposed to intermittent
hardware faults due to cosmic radiation or impure packaging material. Facebook’s



--- PAGE 5 ---
data centres that serve a multitude of apps, such as Facebook, WhatsApp, and In-
stagram, experienced silent data corruptions, causing inaccurate computations [6].
Such runtime silent faults occur as a result of manufacturing defects at the silicon
level [5]. The aging of microservices also introduces faults, which are undetected
by Kubernetes probes, according to [17]. BROFY [10] explains the need to develop
approaches for microservices’ integrity validation as the attackers or faulty hard-
ware could introduce bitflip errors (one or more of the bits gets flipped, changing
the runtime behaviour) to the computation infrastructure, causing silent and unde-
tectable failures. These works discuss the importance of developing approaches to
detect runtime faults in microservices, which is the focus of this work.
3
Related Work
Existing works have studied approaches to enhance the monitoring capabilities of mi-
croservices to detect performance issues [4, 22, 13, 3, 18]. These works leverage eBPF
to observe microservices’ runtime behaviour by focusing on the networking activi-
ties [13], including TCP traffic [22] and latency [18], CPU activations [3, 22, 4], Block
I/O performance [22] to understand the performance bottlenecks. Although these
works aim to improve microservices’ performance, they don’t propose fault diagnosis
or suppression.
MAGNet [3] is similar to FUSE in the aspect of application-focused eBPF trac-
ing, but it aims to generate identities for workloads in data centres without detecting
faults using the eBPF traces. Hyunseok et al. [4] introduced a microservices finger-
printing technique by tracing the system calls used by microservices and trained a
machine learning model to classify services. FUSE classifies the microservices based
on eBPF trace, but it uses system calls, disk I/O activities, and function invocations
to generate a unique digest per invocation without employing machine learning.
Furthermore, FUSE contributes a fault detection and suppression framework and a
stability scoring mechanism to tackle runtime faults.
The stability of microservices is studied using eBPF in [20], which leverages vari-
able autoencoders to detect unstable or compromised containers based on eBPF
traces. It monitors a pre-configured set of 72 Linux system calls to capture specific
security incidents and application faults. This work is similar to ours in the aspect of
the eBPF-based approach for stability analysis, but we focus on application-level or
microservices fingerprinting using system calls, function invocation, and disk accesses
without involving any machine learning. Areeg and Claus [19] detect anomalies in
containerised microservices using Markov Models, wherein the key performance in-
dicators such as mpstat and vmstat are collected at the application level to learn a
model using Hierarchical Hidden Markov Models, which detect abnormal microser-
vice behaviours with 97% accuracy. Unlike this paper, FUSE generates microservice-
specific eBPF traces and detects stability and abnormality through a hash-based
signature without applying machine learning algorithms. Many other works tackle
anomalies or eBPF-based observability for microservices, but they don’t focus on
fault detection using eBPF-based tracing by combining system calls, function invo-
cations, and disk accesses. Besides, none of the existing works introduces a stability
scorecard for microservices, which is another novel contribution of our work.



--- PAGE 6 ---
4
FUSE: Fault Diagnosis and Suppression with eBPF for
Microservices
4.1
System Model
Modern applications are composed of interconnected microservices, wherein each
service, sx ∈S, could be connected with one or more services. In such circumstances,
whenever the end user issues a request to a service, it may trigger a series of services
to generate a response to the user. Upon receiving a request, reqx, the service,
sx, processes the request by running computations, exex, and produces a response,
resx. Here, exex may involve contacting other services, meaning the response could
be generated with the help of other dependent services. Each service in S gets
invoked numerous times in deployment, depending on the application’s popularity
and the customer base. Each service gets invoked K (K ∈N) times in deployment and
the ith invocation of a service, sx, can be denoted by Ii
x. Each invocation includes
the execution phase (exei
x), which will use the hardware and software resources,
including the Linux kernel. eBPF provides tools to introspect the behaviour of a
service, sx, at the execution phase by capturing kernel-level traces for exei
x, which
is denoted by tracei
x. In summary, ith invocation of a service, sx, can be represented
by a tuple ⟨reqi
x, exei
x, resi
x, tracei
x⟩. This work builds on some key concepts, such
as idempotency and stability, which are defined below.
Definition 1. Idempotency The system’s state remains the same when an opera-
tion is executed once or any number of times [16].
GET and HEAD are examples of idempotent HTTP operations because they don’t
change the server’s state on the request’ successful completion. Besides, even the
same request can be issued many times without altering the server’s state. On the
other hand, the POST operation of HTTP changes the server’s state, meaning it
may add a new item to a database; hence, it is not idempotent.
Definition 2. Idempotent Microservice A microservice is considered idempo-
tent if it doesn’t alter the system’s state when a request is processed once or any
number of times.
A microservice that reads an employee’s data from a database is an example of an
idempotent microservice. In contrast, the service that registers a new employee’s
data is not idempotent as it changes the server’s state.
Definition 3. Trace A trace of a microservice corresponds to the low-level activ-
ities that the service carries out inside the kernel to process an API request. Tx
denotes a set of unique traces of service, sx, and Lx denotes the length of Tx.
Software applications access the CPU, memory, and network by invoking schedulers,
I/O management modules, and network managers to fulfil the desired functionalities.
Here, the low-level activities correspond to all activities that happen within the
kernel as part of the application’s or microservice’s execution.
Definition 4. Strictly Idempotent Trace A microservice’s trace is strictly idem-
potent if it doesn’t change when the same or different requests are processed once or
any number of times.



--- PAGE 7 ---
Considering three invocations, p, q, and r, of service, sx, the trace is said to be
idempotent if and only if:
tracep
x = traceq
x = tracer
x = α, where Tx = {α} and Lx = 1
(1)
For a strictly idempotent microservice, Tx includes only one unique trace, which is
α in this case; thus, its length is always 1.
Definition 5. Partially Idempotent Trace A microservice’s trace is said to be
partially idempotent if it produces more than one trace consistently (1 < L > τ).
In other words, a partially idempotent microservice produces multiple traces when
handling requests but only produces up to τ number of unique traces.
The microservice sx is partially idempotent when it consists of three known consis-
tent traces α, β and γ in Tx (i.e., Tx = {α, β, γ}). Considering three invocations,
p, q, and r, of service, sx, the trace is said to be partially idempotent because
tracep
x = α, tracer
x = β, tracer
x = γ. Here, Lx is 3, because Tx = {α, β, γ}. Repeated
executions of sx will always produce one of α, β or γ as traces, except when there
is a fault.
Definition 6. Stability of a Microservice: A microservice is said to be stable
if its traces are strictly or partially idempotent. The stability of a service in per-
centage is calculated using traces generated from E invocations. The stability of a
microservice, smx, is:
smx = (1 −(1 ÷ Lx)) ∗100
(2)
Figure 2 (top) shows an example of a strictly idempotent service with a stability
score of 0% for E of 4 because it produces the same trace. On the other hand,
when the service produces more than one trace for E (E ∈N) invocations, then it
is considered partially idempotent. Figure 2 (bottom) illustrates a partially idem-
potent service with a stability score of 50% for E of 4, indicating two unique traces
α and β. The stability score of a strictly idempotent service is always lower than
a partially idempotent service’s stability score, assuming both services are invoked
E times equally. Furthermore, the higher stability score indicates runtime inconsis-
tency, helping developers and administrators to build highly stable services.
Fig. 2. Stability Score of Strictly and Partially Idempotent Service based on 5 Invocations.



--- PAGE 8 ---
Fig. 3. FUSE Architecture: Normal line indicates operations in idempotency validation
mode, while the dotted line denotes fault detection and suppression operations.
4.2
Architecture of FUSE
At a high level, FUSE is a cross-layer architecture running at user and kernel spaces,
as shown in Figure 3. Microservices run in a computing environment, including a
cloud instance. Typically, services are hosted on a framework such as Spring Boot.
An operating system such as Ubuntu manages the resources for the application-
level services. In this model, the operating system functions within the kernel space
without offering much visibility to the users. In contrast, the services sit in the user
space, leveraging the operating system to function correctly.
FUSE leverages eBPF to monitor and extract kernel space activities of services to
generate signatures and suppress faults. The user space activities for eBPF include
setting up the necessary hooks and the configurations to generate, process, store,
and validate traces. In contrast, the kernel space intercepts the traces required for
the target microservices. The fundamental building blocks of FUSE are discussed in
the rest of the section.
FUSE Configurations FUSE can operate in two modes, including idempotency
validation and fault detection and suppression modes, based on the configurations set
by the microservices administrator. In the idempotency validation mode, FUSE runs
the same microservice E times and collects the traces in a database. Subsequently,
the traces are analysed to determine whether the microservice is strictly or partially
idempotent. This mode must be activated for each microservice before production
for fault diagnosis and suppression. The fault detection and suppression mode is
activated at runtime to validate the microservices’ trace for each invocation against
the database. As shown in Figure 3, this mode uses a different set of building blocks
for detecting and suppressing faults based on the runtime traces.
Syscall Monitor tracks the system calls used by the microservice. At each mi-
croservice’s invocation, this building block intercepts the system calls and generates
a list, including the counts for each system call. For example, read is one of the
widespread system calls, and it opens a file or a resource. Functions Tracer traces



--- PAGE 9 ---
Algorithm 1: FUSE in idempotency validation and fault detection and
suppression modes: Stability score calculation is included in idempotency
validation mode.
FUSE in idempotency validation mode
Require: Sx, E
T ←{} /* Empty T
*/
for i = 1 to E do
tracei = generateDigest(Sx)
if tracei /∈T then
T = T ∪tracei
end if
end for
storeTraceinDatabase(Sx,T )
return
FUSE Stability Score Calculation
Require: Sx, T
L ←0 /* Length of T
is 0 */
sm ←0 /* Stability score is initialised 0 */
L = |T | /* Length of T
*/
sm = (1 −(1 ÷ L))*100 /* Stability score is calculated */
storeStabilityScoreinDatabase(Sx,sm)
return
FUSE in fault detection and suppression mode
tracej = generateDigest(Sx) /* jth invocation of a service */
if tracej /∈T then
notifyFault()
end if
the functions and libraries invoked by the microservice. For each invocation, this cap-
tures the list of files and libraries accessed by the microservice. Disk Read/Write
Tracker tracks the number of reads and writes, including memory allocations, that
happen during the execution of microservice along with a pointer to a file, indicating
the files that were read from or written to.
Digest (or Signature) Generator processes the traces generated by the syscall
monitor, functions tracer, and disk read/write tracker to create a digest or signature
for each invocation. The digest is made by counting the number of calls, the list of
functions invoked, the amount of data read from or written to, and malloc alloca-
tions. A cryptographic hash function such as sha256 creates a unique signature per
invocation.
Idempotency Validator processes the digests during the idempotency vali-
dation mode by studying the consistency of digests. As mentioned in Section 4.2,



--- PAGE 10 ---
each microservice is executed E times to perform idempotency validation. There-
fore, this process is data intensive as multiple traces must be generated to determine
whether a given microservice is strictly or partially idempotent. A strictly idempo-
tent microservice would always produce the same cryptographic hash because such
a microservice always executes the same system calls, accesses the same list of func-
tions, has the same data read from or written to, and allocates the same amount of
memory. Algorithm 1 explains FUSE’s operations.
Digest Database stores and manages digests associated with a microservice-
based application. It is important to note that each microservice need not have its
database; instead, a single database can be used to manage the digests.
Fault Detector gets activated in fault detection and suppression mode, and it
is responsible for checking whether a digest of a recent microservice’s invocation
produces the known and expected digests (strictly vs. partially idempotent). Recall
that a strictly idempotent microservice will have the same digest unless there is a
fault. In contrast, a partially idempotent microservice will have one of the known
finite traces if non-faulty (see Definition 7). This module checks the digest and
generates an alert to the service admin. Besides, the digest is also notified to the
circuit breaker for fault suppression.
4.3
Fault Diagnosis and Suppression
Fig. 4. Fault breaks the idempotency of both strictly and partially idempotent service.
Definition 7. Faulty Microservice A microservice is said to be faulty when its
traces are intermittently non-idempotent. Both strictly idempotent and partially
idempotent microservice can experience faults at runtime, breaking idempotency.
Figure 4 elucidates how a strictly idempotent microservice can experience an un-
expected fault at runtime due to hardware or software failures, breaking the trace
consistency. Note that any trace other than α is considered faulty for the strictly
idempotent service in Figure 4 (top). On the other hand, a partially idempotent ser-
vice must generate one of the known traces to be considered non-faulty; however, the
3rd invocation (see Figure 4 (bottom)) produces an unexpected trace of ∆, denoting
a runtime fault.



--- PAGE 11 ---
Figure 1 (left) shows that a single faulty service could impact other intercon-
nected services if left untreated. Circuit breakers are recommended to increase the
resiliency and availability of microservices in the event of cascading failures. A cir-
cuit breaker relies on fault event to open the circuit to prevent cascading failures.
Network-related issues, server failures, and overloads are considered fault events in
circuit breakers, allowing microservices to overcome major and obvious faults. Our
approach complements existing techniques and further strengthens the circuit break-
ers by tackling less-obvious faults, which could arise due to hardware abnormalities
or any unexpected behaviour only noticeable at runtime, including the involvement
of an adversary. Our fault suppression technique is presented in the next section.
4.4
Fault Suppression
FUSE digests (or signatures) provide a stable reference for fault diagnosis, as a
service could be strictly or partially idempotent. Our fault suppression technique is
proxy-based [2], meaning that the service interacts with other dependent services if
and only if the digest of the current invocation satisfies the idempotency property
(see Definitions 4 and 5). Any variations to the digest (or trace) indicate a fault
(see Definition 7), suppressing outbound communications with dependent services,
as shown in Figure 1 (right). The circuit breaker opens the connection to prevent
cascading failures. The fault detection and suppression mode monitors the trace
following Algorithm 1 and notifies faults to the appropriate agent. Following a proxy-
based fault suppression scheme, the outgoing requests to dependent microservices
are blocked to prevent cascading failures, as shown in Figure 1.
4.5
Stability Score
FUSE validates the stability of microservices through a stability scorer module,
as shown in Figure 3. As discussed in Definition 6, the stability of a microservice
depends on its trace (or signature) consistency. Our stability scoring mechanism
provides a score between 0% and 100% for microservices. A score closer to 0%
indicates high stability, while any score close to 100% indicates poor stability. Strictly
idempotent services have a low stability score, while partially idempotent services
have a high stability score (> 0%). The stability scorer module takes the digests
from the database and counts the unique digests per microservice in the idempotency
validation mode, as shown in Algorithm 1.
This score is beneficial for system administrators and microservice architects.
From the service management and resilience viewpoint, having a strictly idempo-
tent microservice with a stability score of 0% maximises the determinism and fault
detection capabilities. In contrast, any score above 0% shows the non-determinism
of the microservice. Besides, when designing a microservice, the developers can aim
to compose a strictly idempotent microservice by using FUSE’s stability score as it
helps the developers understand hidden uncertainties in the code, which is only no-
ticeable at runtime. Figure 2 shows how the stability score is calculated for strictly
and partially idempotent microservices.



--- PAGE 12 ---
5
Proof-of-Concept Implementation and Evaluation
FUSE is implemented using eBPF and tested on AWS EC2 instances running the
Ubuntu operating system. To validate the practicality of FUSE, we have developed
POST and GET services using Python Flask with the following functionalities: 1)
New user registration service (S1): receives a POST request with the user
details, including the name, address, and country, and stores them in a MySQL
database. 2) Users data retriever service (S2): handles a GET request to gather
the users’ data from a MySQL database and sends it back to the requester. 3)
Password strength checker service (S3): receives a POST request to check the
strength of a password the user selects. It receives a password string and checks
its strength by assessing the lower and upper cases, digits, and length, and returns
the password strength as Strong or Weak. 4) Addition service (S4): adds the
numbers in the request and returns the sum as a response. Our proof-of-concept
implementation used a proxy that generates and validates the trace (or signature)
for each POST or GET request. We evaluate the performance and stability of the
example representative services and report the results. Each service was executed
more than 1000 times in idempotency validation mode, i.e. E > 1000.
5.1
Idempotency of Example Services
For E > 1000, services S1, S2, S3, and S4 have T of 4, 3, 3, and 9, respectively,
making them partially idempotent. The sha256 hash is shortened to four characters
in Table 1 for brevity. However, the real digest is 64 characters long. The amount of
memory used, the number of functions accessed, and system calls invoked changes
depend on the microservices, resulting in unique hashes per service. Figure 5 shows
the distribution of hashes for S1, S2, S3, and S4 - it is clear that each microservice
has a dominating hash that appears more than 97% of the time. Besides, S1, S2, S3,
and S4 have stability scores of 50, 75, 66.6, and 90, respectively. The lower stability
score corresponds to high determinism and stability. S1 is the most stable among
the example services, while S4 is the least stable. Figure 6 shows how the stability
score evolved with each invocation and stabilised. The instability of S4 and the high
stability of S1 are apparent in Figure 6.
Service
T
L
Service
Type
E
Stability
Score (in %)
S1
{’8507’:7,’f8ec’:998}
2
Partially
Idempotent 1005
50
S2
{’3173’:2, ’7eb0’:1015, ’913b’:1, ’51a7’:4}
4
Partially
Idempotent 1022
75
S3
{’075d’:1094, ’4532’:11, ’6947’:1}
3
Partially
Idempotent 1106
66.6
S4
{’05db’:1, ’23e2’:3, ’4d6b’:6, ’6398’:1163,’68c0’:1,
’735d’:4, ’8801’:2,’e280’:2, ’f541’:7, ’d447’:1}
10
Partially
Idempotent 1190
90
Table 1. Stability Score of Services based on Traces.



--- PAGE 13 ---
Fig. 5. Distribution of FUSE Traces for Services S1, S2, S3, and S4.
5.2
Overhead of FUSE
Traditional microservices don’t rely on kernel-level traces for fault suppression. Thus,
they don’t incur any overhead within the request-response cycle. When a request is
sent to a microservice, it gets processed, and the response is sent back. However,
FUSE introduces an overhead in storage and latency. The Storage Overhead of
FUSE originates from the storage of traces generated. FUSE produces multiple
eBPF trace files to store file accesses, system call statistics, memory allocations,
and disk operations. The storage overhead of FUSE per microservice execution is
presented in Table 2, wherein the disk IO trace file takes up the most space while
the system calls take up the least space, but these can be deleted periodically or
immediately based on the requirements.
The Latency of FUSE differs from traditional microservices as the digest is
generated immediately after the completion of each invocation. Without FUSE, S1,
S2, S3, and S4 have an average latency of 13 milliseconds (ms), 14 ms, 5 ms, and
6 ms, respectively. In contrast, the average latency of S1, S2, S3, and S4 increases
Fig. 6. Stability Score vs. Number of Invocations for S1, S2, S3, and S4.



--- PAGE 14 ---
Service Syscall Trace
(Bytes)
Function Trace
(Bytes)
Disk I/O Trace
(Bytes)
S1
751
1710
16380
S2
751
1710
16379
S3
751
1647
16380
S4
1039
1647
16385
Table 2. Storage Overhead for Trace Files
to 235 ms, 204 ms, 168 ms, and 276 ms with FUSE. The increased latency comes
from processing the traces and the generation and notification of digest, which will
be optimised in future work.
5.3
Faults Detected by FUSE
FUSE detected 84 faults at runtime for services S1 and S2 while S3 and S4 did not
experience any faults, meaning all the traces for S3 and S4 came from T listed in
Table 1. In contrast, for S1 and S2, FUSE detected faults with random traces that are
unfound in T in Table 1. These 81 faults are because S1 and S2 rely on a MySQL
database, which crashed due to being out of memory as OOM killer terminated
the MySQL process, generating faulty traces. These traces indicated early signs of
memory issues as they had additional system calls. The services ran correctly as long
as there was enough memory, and then it started to experience faults, resulting in
random and unknown traces, triggering faults. For S1, the observed traces during
fault include (6805, 771a, 23fe), while for S2, the faulty traces include (dcdd, 1035).
These faults underscore FUSE’s effectiveness in capturing runtime faults.
6
Discussion
Tool Selection for Digest Generation: eBPF provides a rich set of tools to
generate traces of user-level programs, including microservices. This paper selects a
few tools targeting system calls, function invocations, and disk operations. Table 1
shows that the microservices leave unique digests at the kernel level, indicating the
effectiveness of the selected tools. However, there are more opportunities to expand
the trace generation capabilities of FUSE to identify more hidden faults and runtime
inconsistencies, which is an exciting direction for future work. Impact of Inputs
on the Digest: Each invocation of service is unique due to the varying nature of
inputs. Many microservices check the inputs’ validity before processing to prevent
crashes. The evaluation presented in this paper considered different microservices
with acceptable inputs. However, there are opportunities to carry out a deeper anal-
ysis of traces by varying the input drastically, which is also an interesting future
work.
Platform-agnostic Traces: The evaluation leveraged AWS EC2 instances with
an Ubuntu operating system to validate FUSE. There is an opportunity to run the
same microservices on different types of eBPF-compatible Linux operating systems,
such as Amazon Linux to understand whether the traces are platform-agnostic. This
paper assumes that FUSE traces are generated in idempotency validation mode on



--- PAGE 15 ---
the platform where microservices will run in production. While this helps many
real-world microservices, it would be good to strengthen FUSE by testing how the
digests change when a new platform is introduced, as it would allow the administra-
tor to migrate services to different platforms, considered future work. Enhancing
the Interface Efficiency of User and Kernel Spaces: The proof-of-concept
implementation leverages signals and timers to pass information between user and
kernel space programs. While this demonstrates the effectiveness of FUSE, there is
an opportunity to enhance the interface’s efficiency further. eBPF provides kprobes
with customisation capabilities to improve the performance of FUSE, which requires
developing novel extensions to eBPF. The authors plan to explore this in future work
as it would reduce the overhead, including latency.
7
Conclusion
Microservices experience faults at runtime due to hardware issues, software bugs, and
network interruptions. The ability to detect faults for microservice invocation would
allow the administrators to better detect looming failures, including the prevention of
cascading failures, as one faulty microservice could cause failures in multiple services.
This paper introduced FUSE, a novel fault diagnosis and suppression tool based on
eBPF. FUSE categorises microservices into strictly or partially idempotent services
based on runtime traces generated by services. Furthermore, FUSE dynamically
detects runtime faults by comparing the trace of each execution against the expected
trace. Besides, it also prevents fault propagation by blocking external requests to
other services whenever a fault is detected.
FUSE introduces a novel stability scoring mechanism for microservices by as-
signing a score to each microservice based on its trace consistency and the type of
idempotency. The proof-of-concept implementation using eBPF and Flask and the
deployment in AWS EC2 instances demonstrate FUSE’s practicality for real-world
applications. FUSE’s performance evaluation results using four representative mi-
croservices show that many services have a set of unique digests; the services produce
unknown and random hashes when there is a runtime fault, including out-of-memory
issues. The successful detection of 84 runtime faults highlights the benefits of FUSE,
but it introduces an overhead in the form of high latency and storage.
The future work includes the optimisation of FUSE’s performance by developing
customised eBPF probes, validation of FUSE’s platform agnosticism by running
the same services on different types of eBPF-compatible Linux platforms, and the
inclusion of novel features to understand how inputs impact the digests by varying
the inputs drastically for test services.
References
1. Cerveira, F., Oliveira, R.A., Barbosa, R., Madeira, H.: Evaluation of restful frameworks
under soft errors. In: 2020 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering (ISSRE). pp. 369–379. IEEE (2020)
2. Chandramouli, R.: Microservices-based application systems. NIST Special Publication
800(204), 800–204 (2019)



--- PAGE 16 ---
3. Chang, H., Kodialam, M., Lakshman, T.V., Mukherjee, S., Van der Merwe, J., Zaheer,
Z.: Magnet: Machine learning guided application-aware networking for data centers.
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing 11(1), 291–307 (2023)
4. Chang, H., Kodialam, M., Lakshman, T., Mukherjee, S.: Microservice fingerprinting
and classification using machine learning. In: 2019 IEEE 27th International Conference
on Network Protocols (ICNP). pp. 1–11 (2019)
5. Constantinescu, C.: Intermittent faults and effects on reliability of integrated circuits.
In: 2008 Annual Reliability and Maintainability Symposium. pp. 370–374. IEEE (2008)
6. Dixit, H.D., Pendharkar, S., Beadon, M., Mason, C., Chakravarthy, T., Muthiah, B.,
Sankar, S.: Silent data corruptions at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11245 (2021)
7. Dragoni, N., Giallorenzo, S., Lafuente, A.L., Mazzara, M., Montesi, F., Mustafin, R.,
Safina, L.: Microservices: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow, pp. 195–216. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, Cham (2017)
8. Fulton III, S.M.: What led amazon to its own microservices architecture. The New
Stack (2015)
9. Goldshtein, S.: The next linux superpower: Ebpf primer. USENIX Association: Dublin,
Ireland (2016)
10. Hartono, A.P.P., Fetzer, C.: Brofy: Towards essential integrity protection for microser-
vices. In: 2021 40th International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS).
pp. 154–163. IEEE (2021)
11. Jagadeesan, L.J., Mendiratta, V.B.: When failure is (not) an option: Reliability models
for microservices architectures. In: 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering Workshops (ISSREW). pp. 19–24. IEEE (2020)
12. Kakivaya, G., Xun, L., Hasha, R., Ahsan, S.B., Pfleiger, T., Sinha, R., Gupta, A., Tarta,
M., Fussell, M., Modi, V., et al.: Service fabric: a distributed platform for building
microservices in the cloud. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth EuroSys conference. pp.
1–15 (2018)
13. Levin, J., Benson, T.A.: Viperprobe: Rethinking microservice observability with ebpf.
In: 2020 IEEE 9th International Conference on Cloud Networking (CloudNet). pp. 1–8
(2020)
14. Li, W., Lemieux, Y., Gao, J., Zhao, Z., Han, Y.: Service mesh: Challenges, state of
the art, and future research opportunities. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Service-Oriented System Engineering (SOSE). pp. 122–1225 (2019)
15. McCanne, S., Jacobson, V.: The bsd packet filter: A new architecture for user-level
packet capture. In: USENIX winter. vol. 46 (1993)
16. Microservices, B.J., Varanasi, B., Bartkov, M.: Spring REST. Springer (2021)
17. Power, A., Kotonya, G.: A microservices architecture for reactive and proactive fault
tolerance in iot systems. In: 2018 IEEE 19th International Symposium on ”A World of
Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks” (WoWMoM). pp. 588–599 (2018)
18. Ranjitha, K., Tammana, P., Kannan, P.G., Naik, P.: A case for cross-domain observ-
ability to debug performance issues in microservices. In: 2022 IEEE 15th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD). pp. 244–246. IEEE (2022)
19. Samir, A., Pahl, C.: Dla: Detecting and localizing anomalies in containerized microser-
vice architectures using markov models. In: 2019 7th International Conference on Fu-
ture Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud). pp. 205–213 (2019)
20. Sharma, P., Porras, P., Cheung, S., Carpenter, J., Yegneswaran, V.: Scalable microser-
vice forensics and stability assessment using variational autoencoders (2021)
21. Singleton, A.: The economics of microservices. IEEE Cloud Computing 3(5), 16–20
(2016)
22. Weng, T., Yang, W., Yu, G., Chen, P., Cui, J., Zhang, C.: Kmon: An in-kernel trans-
parent monitoring system for microservice systems with ebpf. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM
International Workshop on Cloud Intelligence (CloudIntelligence). pp. 25–30 (2021)
