

--- PAGE 1 ---
eBPF-Enhanced Complete Observability Solution
for Cloud-native Microservices
Bhavye Sharma and Deepak Nadig
Dept. of Computer and Information Technology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907
Email: {sharm609, nadig}@purdue.edu
Abstract—Microservices have emerged as a popular pattern
for developing large-scale applications in cloud environments
for their flexibility, scalability, and agility benefits. Further-
more, orchestration services like Kubernetes have simplified the
deployment of cloud-native applications. However, monitoring
and debugging these complex networked applications has be-
come increasingly challenging, creating additional overheads.
Traditionally, observability or monitoring requires developers to
instrument their applications to expose metrics, logs, and traces
using language-restricted libraries. This approach does not work
well in a multi-tenant cloud environment as it cannot monitor
processes or containers that are not instrumented or hidden.
A critical challenge is managing complexity by consistently in-
strumenting multiple microservices across application platforms
and programming languages. Hence, there is a need for a low-
overhead cloud-native solution that provides complete observ-
ability for distributed and containerized environments. eBPF is
a Linux VM technology that can instrument the host kernel
directly and provides out-of-the-box cloud-native observability
with negligible performance overheads. This paper proposes an
eBPF-based solution that offers complete observability for cloud-
native deployments. Further, we compare the performance and
effectiveness of our solution with popular observability agents like
Node Exporter and cAdvisor. We show that our proposed solution
reduces CPU overheads by up to 210 times while requiring up to
159% less memory than the alternatives. Lastly, we deploy and
test our solution on a Chameleon cloud bare metal testbed.
Index Terms—eBPF, Observability, Kubernetes, Service Mesh
I. INTRODUCTION
Observability in cloud-native applications is the ability to
compile three vital classes of information, i.e., metrics, logs,
and traces [1]. Metrics are numeric data representations over
time and may utilize mathematical modeling or prediction
to derive knowledge of a system’s behavior [1]. Metrics are
optimized for storage, compression, and retrieval, enabling
longer retention and faster querying. Logs are an immutable,
timestamped record of discrete events over time. Lastly, traces
represent the interaction amongst distributed applications and
enable a macro view of the request-response life-cycle. A
single request may traverse multiple services spread across
different servers or geographical locations in a distributed
system. While achieving observability in monolithic applica-
tions is straightforward as their code-base/deployment resides
on a single infrastructure endpoint, accomplishing the same
task is complex in cloud-native deployments. In monolithic
applications, the developer can instrument the application or
the host to collect observability data. However, in cloud-native
deployments with numerous containers, distributed hosts, and
various microservices implementation ecosystems, it is not
feasible to manually instrument distinct microservices or oper-
ating system (OS) kernels with additional observability code.
Thus, a critical problem in ensuring observability for cloud-
native applications is the associated overhead to maintaining
and updating observability code across diverse microservices
implementation ecosystems.
The sidecar (i.e., a helper container running alongside
the application container in a Kubernetes pod) approach for
observability reduces the overhead of maintaining multiple
applications by redirecting all observability functionality from
the application container to a separate (sidecar) container. Typ-
ically, sidecars deployed alongside each microservice handle
networking functions and perform L3, L4, and L7 network
observability tasks. However, the sidecar approach to observ-
ability is limited to the collection of network metrics only, i.e.,
latency, traffic/error rates and traces. Therefore, as sidecars
add to the container overheads on the cloud-native cluster,
they have the drawback of utilizing valuable cluster resources,
including computing, storage and networking. Further, while
sidecars are particularly useful in detecting problems in mi-
croservices, they fail to provide precise root-cause analysis
of the problem. For example, we can identify misbehaving
services using traces and analyze latency, but debugging the
application containers’ internals is impossible via sidecars.
Therefore, to achieve complete observability of containers,
we must collect observability data directly from the low-
level host OS. While numerous agent-based approaches exist
(e.g., OpenTelemetry, cAdvisor [2], AWS X-Ray, Cloudwatch
Container Insights), deploying these solutions (typically in
user space) incurs additional resource overheads, impacting
deployed workloads’ performance.
This paper presents a complete observability solution that
utilizes the extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF) in the
Linux kernel. Our proposed solution relies on small eBPF-
based event-triggered programs to extend the OS functionality
without instrumenting the corresponding application code.
Unlike existing solutions, our eBPF-based approach operates
in the kernel space at line speeds without degrading the per-
formance of the events they are instrumenting. By leveraging
kernel space eBPF-based observability agents, our solution
directly collects deep contextual observability data without
additional overheads. We demonstrate the effectiveness and su-
periority of our proposed solution through significant overhead
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
978-1-7281-9054-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
1980
ICC 2024 - IEEE International Conference on Communications | 978-1-7281-9054-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICC51166.2024.10622329
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
reduction compared to the status quo. Further, our proposed
solution allows for deep contextual visibility into the observed
application without the burden of instrumentation.
Our specific contributions are as follows:
• We evaluate current non-eBPF observability solutions and
identify performance overheads and bottlenecks.
• We propose and implement an effective solution provid-
ing complete observability for using eBPF exporter [3]
and Deepflow.io [4].
• We evaluate the scalability and effectiveness of our so-
lutions using a real-world cloud test-bed deployment and
assess it using chaos experiments and user workloads.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides the background and related works in observability
and provides the context for our work; Section III describes
the design of the microservice observability framework for
cloud-native infrastructure; Section IV presents the solution
architecture of our eBPF-enhanced microservice observability
framework; Section V describes the experimental testbed and
setup; Section VI presents extensive results from our exper-
iments and the discussion; In Section VII we conclude our
work and outline the future research directions.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
This section presents an overview of Kubernetes, Open-
Telemetry, and eBPF and outlines the related works and
associated observability challenges.
A. Kubernetes and OpenTelemetry
Kubernetes [5] is a highly modular and extensible open-
source container orchestration platform that automates con-
tainerized applications’ deployment, scaling, and manage-
ment. Maintained by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation
(CNCF), its architecture consists of interconnected compo-
nents that work together to manage container lifecycle and
their resource consumption. OpenTelemtry (OTel) [6] is a
CNCF-incubated project originating from Google’s OpenCen-
sus and OpenTracing projects. OTel provides standardized
Software Development Kits (SDKs), Application Program-
ming Interfaces (APIs), and tools for ingesting, transforming,
and shipping data to an observability backend. OTel provides
per-language instrumentation libraries to export metrics, logs,
and traces from applications. The framework supports various
languages and platforms, including Java, Go, Node.js, Python,
and .NET. Instrumenting each application with OTel is tedious
in an agile, multi-language environment. Another limitation of
OpenTelemetry is that it is only aware of the L7 metrics of an
application; it does not collect information in other layers,
the networking stack or the kernel level, which is critical
for cloud-native observability. Lastly, OpenTelemetry clusters
observability data from multiple pods together as services,
limiting its ability to perform pod-level analysis.
B. Extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF)
Recently, eBPF has garnered much attention for load balanc-
ing, firewalls, and network security [7]. For example, Android
uses it for in-kernel tracing and security [8], and Netflix uses
it for injecting observability data into their networking stack.
The original BPF patch [9] added a new programmable virtual
machine (VM) with two registers to filter networking events
based on predicates. In 2013, Alexei Starovoitov patched this
VM with eight 64-bit registers and added support for kernel
probes (kprobes), user probes(uprobes), and user statically
defined traces (USDT), which extended the capabilities of BPF
beyond network filtering. An eBPF program is a sequence of
64-bit instructions verified for safety and high performance
by the compiler. It is JIT-compiled using tools like Clang
LLVM on the host machine to instrument it for the target.
eBPF programs export kernel-level metrics by writing them to
memory maps located inside the kernel space but accessible
via user space. This approach reduces the need to copy
data from kernel space to user space, allowing for higher
throughput at lower overheads. This lower overhead allows us
to dynamically run eBPF scripts in production environments
to debug real-world systems without impacting users.
C. Related Works
The authors in [10] propose ViperProbe, an eBPF-based
deep microservice metrics collection tool. ViperProbe focuses
on improving metrics collection for service meshes by associ-
ating Process ID (PID) context with the metrics. This approach
improves over generic metrics monitoring that does not differ-
entiate individual host services. ViperProbe also includes an
offline search paradigm for analyzing patterns to determine the
minimal but effective set of metrics, i.e., CriticalMetrics, that
enable run-time diagnosis of a service. In [11], the authors
create a microservice tracing system requiring minimal code
modification (auto instrumentation) and demonstrate tracing
with little influence on the system performance. Their system
monitors network packet headers and generates traces but
does not consider other in-kernel metrics. The authors in [12]
propose MiSeRTrace, a kernel-level microservice visibility
tool that utilizes eBPF to instrument tracing for individual
pods in a service mesh at the kernel level. The work in [13]
uses the eBPF to perform profiling using eBPF in a distributed
payments system using two implementations of the Interledger
protocol specifications. In contrast to the above, our work
focuses on developing an eBPF-based, complete observability
solution for cloud-native environments with metrics,logs and
distributed traces.
Unlike monolithic architectures, where components com-
municate through in-process calls, microservice architectures
encounter more service interaction failures as they happen
over potentially unreliable networks. Containers are designed
to be ephemeral, spun up and destroyed rapidly, making it
challenging to track their associated data. Also, containers
deployed on distributed hosts make gathering a comprehensive
view of service behavior and performance complex. Lastly,
using Kubernetes to manage containers necessitates monitor-
ing additional components such as the kube-apiserver,
kube-controller-manager, proxies, kubelet, and
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
1981
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
the container network interface (CNI). Next, we present our
eBPF-based microservices observability framework.
III. PROPOSED OBSERVABILITY FRAMEWORK
Current solutions to achieve observability utilize user space
programs to capture and analyze data, resulting in significant
performance overheads. Our proposed approach focuses on
moving these responsibilities to kernel space eBPF programs
to drastically reduce the overheads while attaching deep con-
textual information for this data from the kernel. Further,
we can dynamically inject our proposed eBPF framework
into any deployed application without recompilation or re-
deployment. Our proposed solution improves over existing
eBPF exporters from Cloudflare and incorporates new features
into several .bpf.c scripts, including accept-latency,
cachestat, llcstat, malloc, oomkill, runqlat,
shrinklat, and tcpbacklog.
Our proposed microservice observability framework em-
ploys an eBPF-based solution to monitor the following three
layers of containerized applications in cloud-native settings:
1) Microservices Layer: Using OTel libraries, we instru-
ment microservices to attach additional distributed trace
context to the East-West network packets. The context
is propagated in the headers of network packets.
2) Container Network Layer: Using our proposed eBPF
agents deployed on our cluster nodes, we monitor our
applications’ RED metrics, i.e., rate error and duration.
The eBPF agents captured and exported throughput,
latency and error codes. By leveraging the Deepflow
eBPF library [4], the agent provides a mechanism for
the automated collection of context-propagation and
OpenTelemetry distributed traces.
3) Infrastructure Layer: Our proposed eBPF agents de-
ployed with Cloudflares’ eBPF exporter enable us to
obtain detailed container-aware telemetry about the clus-
ter nodes and aid in debugging and troubleshooting
anomalies.
Our framework relies on Prometheus to provide a data store
for observability data sources and helps visualize it using
Grafana [14] dashboards. Figure 1 shows our proposed frame-
works’ integration with existing Kubernetes infrastructure. Our
proposed solution consists of multiple eBPF programs running
in the kernel-space triggered by system calls generated
by our application. A prometheus collector runs on worker
nodes and regularly scrapes the eBPF agents on our cluster to
extract data the eBPF agent collects.
IV. SOLUTION ARCHITECTURE
Our solution achieves complete microservices observability
for Kubernetes applications by combining three observability
levels. Further, our solution ensures scalability and efficient
operation to collect metrics and traces from distributed con-
tainers and detect performance anomalies. We deploy our
eBPF-based solution on each cluster node and extend the
OS functionality dynamically without affecting the applica-
tion life-cycle. We export observability data generated at all
Fig. 1: eBPF-based observability agents
levels to a Prometheus instance and visualize them using our
custom-built Grafana dashboards. Figure 2 shows the internal
architecture of our worker nodes. Our microservices run inside
the container runtime environment behind an Envoy sidecar
proxy. The eBPF agent runs as a DaemonSet in all our
cluster nodes kernel-space. The sidecar, collector and
applications provide distributed trace IDs and metrics to the
Prometheus instance with a scrape interval of 1 second.
Algorithm 1 Measuring I/O Operations Latency
Require: Number of Disks attached to kernel (Dn), Time of
Operations Hash Map (Htstart).
Output: F(block_rq_insert)←kprobes, and
F(block_rq_issue) ←kprobes.
1: Htstart ←Record the current timestamp for request ri.
2: if block_rq_complete = True then
3:
∆t(ri) = tnow −tstart
4: end if
5: Prometheus ←eBPF Exporter ←Htstart
Algorithm 2 Mapping Distributed Network Traces
Require: Trace Information Hash Map (HDT ).
Output: F(connect) ←kprobes,
F(accept) ←kprobes, and
F(close) ←kprobes.
1: if NumBytes ̸= 0 then
2:
traceid ←x-Request-ID
3:
HDT ←traceid{⟨src, dest, timestamp, proto⟩}
4: end if
5: if Exists traceid then
6:
/* Create full span */
7:
Append ⟨src, dest, timestamp, proto⟩to traceid{}
8: end if
9: Prometheus ←eBPF Exporter ←Htstart
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
1982
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
The Algorithms 1 and 2 shown below present two ex-
ample observability operations implemented by our solution.
Algorithm 1 outlines the procedure to compute the block
I/O latencies using the eBPF hash map, and Algorithm 2
demonstrates the procedure for creating complete time spans
by mapping distributed network traces using a traceid.
Fig. 2: Proposed Solution Architecture
A. Reducing OpenTelemetry Collector Overheads
Manually instrumented applications are the first level of
observability in our solution. We achieve this by integrating
OTel libraries to instrument our application. We propose a
two-step approach to achieve complete application-layer ob-
servability. First, we use the OTel language SDK to generate
metrics, logs, and traces. While this requires the application
developer to instrument an application, it is a robust way
to expose custom (organization-specific) observability data.
Next, our eBPF-agent collects the metrics and traces generated
by the OpenTelemetry instrumented application and exports
them to Prometheus. Our eBPF-based solution leverages the
applications’ port ID or process ID as a key for the eBPF map
to gather data.
B. Eliminating Sidecars for Distributed Tracing
Kubernetes microservice architecture utilizes an ingress or
reverse proxy (Envoy [15]) as the entry point for all incoming
network packets in a network service mesh. OpenTelemetry
uses this proxy to generate distributed traces for the appli-
cations. When pods forward requests to other pods in our
network, the pods’ Envoy sidecars extract and propagate the
distributed trace ID using the X-Request-ID header. By
aggregating information from multiple sidecars, we visualize
the round-trip of our request-response cycle in a distributed
trace. Envoy’s sidecar approach also tracks metrics such as
throughput, latency, and errors. Sidecars like Envoy help
provide layer-7 observability due to their ability to inspect
network packets and decrypt packets using transport layer se-
curity (TLS). However, a complete network stack observability
solution does not require deploying a user space sidecar. Our
proposed solution leverages Deepflow [4] to demonstrate an
eBPF-based approach to distributed tracing in kernel space.
Our solution uses eBPF to natively parse all packets flowing
in our network and extract the X-Request-ID header to
generate a complete distributed trace.
C. Improving the Accuracy of Host-level Metrics
Most host-level observability agents are privileged applica-
tions that access the /proc virtual file system. The /proc
folder contains runtime system information [16] (e.g., hard-
ware configuration). Prometheus NodeExporter is a wrapper
that reads data from the /proc folder and serves it on an
HTTP endpoint. Unlike NodeExporter, cAdvisor [2] exports
metrics and provides a per-container resource utilization break-
down, i.e., a container-aware exporter. While NodeExporter
and cAdvisor provide time series metrics by sampling data in
the /proc folder, they result in information loss [17] based on
the choice of the sampling interval. Our proposed eBPF-based
solution takes a novel approach to the sampling problem. Our
eBPF agent works by running eBPF programs within the Linux
kernel and collects metrics directly from the kernel. These
metrics include comprehensive system performance, resource
utilization, and network traffic information. These metrics
are written to an eBPF Map, capturing all events without
information loss. Further, using an eBPF exporter results in
significantly low overhead (< 1% of NodeExporter [3]), and
ensures comprehensive metrics collection. Thus, our solution
allows access to metrics at the kernel level that are inaccessible
by other tools. This approach makes over 2000 metrics and
tracepoints available for the kernel. Table I compares the
observability capabilities of OpenTelemetry, Envoy Sidecar,
cAdvisor, and NodeExporter with our proposed solution.
D. Test Application Deployment
To test the efficacy of our solution, we deploy a complete
microservice-based e-commerce portal [18] with ten unique
services. Using locust.io, a load-testing framework, we gener-
ate API calls to services and simulate real-world workloads.
Our test setup integrates applications developed on multiple
programming languages, including TypeScript, Go, Javascript,
C++, and C#, and is instrumented to export OpenTelemetry
metrics, logs, and traces. Figure 3 shows the service graph
for the 14 microservices in our deployment. The edge weights
represent the number of requests between the microservices.
We utilize the load generator (Locust) to simulate up to 1000
concurrent users at a spawn rate of 20 users per/second to
generate service traffic for our frontend proxy (Envoy).
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We use the Chameleon Cloud bare-metal platform to
evaluate our eBPF-based observability solution on a 3-node
(1 master, 2 workers) Kubernetes cluster. Each bare-metal
node instance provides an Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2670 v3, 2-
socket CPUs with 48-threads, 128GB of RAM and InfiniBand
networking. We provision the nodes with Ubuntu 22.04, and
our solution will work on any OS with Linux kernel v5.15
or newer. We employ Containerd v1.6.12 as the container
runtime and deploy Kubernetes v1.25.6. A 100GB NFS share
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
1983
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 5 ---
OpenTelemetry
Envoy
cAdvisor
NodeExporter
Our Solution
Traffic Load
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
Packet Loss
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
HTTP Errors
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
Socket Metrics
×
✓
✓
×
✓
Latency
×
✓
×
×
✓
Container Health Check
×
✓
✓
×
×
Container Lifecycle Events
×
×
✓
×
✓
Memory Utilization
×
×
✓
✓
✓
CPU Utilization
×
×
✓
✓
✓
Disk I/O
×
×
✓
✓
✓
File System Utilization
×
×
×
✓
✓
TABLE I: Comparison of our Proposed Solution with other Observability Tools
Fig. 3: Test Application Service Graph with Microservices
stores the Prometheus metrics generated by our cluster. We
deploy various observability tools on our cluster, including
OpenTelemetry Collector, Envoy proxy, NodeExporter, and
cAdvisor and compare them to our eBPF-based solution. Our
eBPF agent leverages the eBPF exporter for in-kernel metrics
collection and Deepflow for distributed microservices tracing.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
First, we evaluate the performance of our solution and com-
pare our approach with existing solutions for application-level
observability. Next, we assess the efficiency of our solution
and provide insights on reducing the latency associated with
eliminating sidecars for distributed tracing. Lastly, we present
workload tests to show our solutions’ performance in a real-
world setting and compare them with the alternatives.
A. Evaluating Observability Overheads
We compare our proposed eBPF solution with popular ob-
servability tools, including OpenTelemetry, Envoy, cAdvisor,
and Node Exporter, as shown in Figure 4a. We observe that our
solution consumes marginally more memory (∼12%) than the
most memory-optimized tool (i.e., NodeExporter). However,
it consumes between 30.95% −159.5% less memory than
the alternatives. Further, we also observe that our eBPF-based
solution consumes between 21×−214× fewer CPU resources
than the alternatives.
To evaluate I/O performance, we employ Flexible IO Tester
(Fio) to spawn several threads to help us test a particular type
of I/O action the user performs. We conduct random read/write
and sequential read/write operations on our worker nodes and
used our solution to detect these workloads. Based on our
observations, host-level metrics were the best indicator for
I/O performance issues. Unlike other tools, our solution im-
plements a block I/O latency measurement (See Algorithm 1)
mechanism that collects detailed metrics (and identifies longer
read and write latency) and histograms. As eBPF scripts can
store some information in the eBPF map, they can aggregate
latency information locally and present it in a histogram format
when Prometheus scrapes the /metrics endpoint.
B. Latency Performance
Traditional distributed tracing, configures Envoy to send
tracing data to the OpenTelemetry Collector, and uses the
Collector’s HTTP receiver to send data. The Collector is
configured to listen on a specific endpoint, i.e., /v1/trace
for trace data and waits for incoming requests. When Envoy
generates a trace, it sends an HTTP POST request to the
Collector’s HTTP receiver, with the trace data in the request’s
body. From our testing, we observed that, on average, there
was a 250µs blocking POST request from Envoy to Open-
Telemetry whenever it attempts to create a distributed trace.
Let P(t,i) denote the latency for each (ith) HTTP POST
request to the /v1/trace endpoint. In a complete service
mesh architecture with multiple Envoy proxies, we incur a
latency cost of ∼250µs for every proxy traversed by the
service request in that request path. Thus, the total latency for
a given service request (with N = {1, ..., n} proxy traversals)
is given by:
Pt =
n
X
k=1
αkP(t,k)
(1)
where αk denotes the latency variation factor for the kth hop.
Our solution eliminates the need for this POST request
by programming the kernel to extract trace-ids from packets
and correlating data using the Deepflow library. This has
significantly faster performance since it is avoiding a blocking
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
1984
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
218
110
140
75
84
2.8
2.1
21.4
5.3
OTel
Envoy
cAdvisor
Node Exp
Our Solution
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
CPU (%)
 Memory
 CPU
T ools
Memory (MB)
(a) Overhead comparison of ob-
servability tools.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
50
100
150
200
250
Requests Per Second
T ime
(s)
(b) Requests per second generated
during the Locust test.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
CPU (%)
Concurrent
Users
 Baremetal
 cAdvisor
 NodeExporter
 Our Solution
(c) Workload testing cluster CPU
utilization comparison.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
Memory (GiB)
Concurrent
Users
 Baremetal
 cAdvisor
 NodeExprter
 Our Solution
(d) Workload testing cluster mem-
ory utilization comparison.
Fig. 4: Experimental Results.
call to the OpenTelemetry collector for every packet traversing
the request path.
C. Workload Performance Testing
We use a locust.io script to generate HTTP calls to our
application for workload performance tests. Current distributed
tracing solutions forward all incoming requests to the Envoy
proxy; Envoy adds trace ID information to these requests,
allowing us to track them in our network service mesh.
We observed increased response times during our workload
tests with the Python HTTP library locust.io employs. While
we can improve response times by leveraging HTTP2 and
increase throughput, we cannot eliminate the HTTP blocking
call latency itself. Our Locust script generates requests from
1000 users, as shown in Figure 4b. Figures 4c and 4d present
the cluster CPU and memory utilization during our workload
testing. The figure shows that our eBPF solution adds minimal
overhead to the bare metal benchmark, i.e., with no observ-
ability tool deployed (baseline). cAdvisor by Google, on the
other hand, had the highest overheads as indicated by the CPU
and memory utilization data. From Figures 4c and 4d, we
also observe that the CPU utilization peaks at 600 concurrent
users since Locust requires additional resources as it ramps up
the requests per second but stabilizes eventually, as shown in
Figure 4b.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents an eBPF-enhanced complete observabil-
ity solution for microservices deployed on distributed Kuber-
netes clusters. Our work focuses on developing a holistic ob-
servability engine for Kubernetes workload that combines the
microservices, container network, and infrastructure telemetry
data into a unified framework. Further, we highlight the
complex interactions between modern applications and their
monitoring challenges. In addition, we developed a metrics
and trace collection framework that eliminates the burden
of developing and maintaining instrumented applications. We
conducted extensive experiments, and our evaluations show
that the proposed solution effectively reduces resource over-
heads compared to the alternatives. Specifically, our solution
reduces cluster CPU and memory resource utilization, on
average, between 21−214 times and 30%−159%, respectively.
Our eBPF-enhanced solution allows us to monitor metrics at
the host level and provide highly detailed information not
attainable by other tools. Lastly, our approach eliminates the
need for HTTP blocking calls for distributed tracing and
significantly improves latency performance.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Sridharan, Distributed Systems Observability: A Guide to Building
Robust Systems.
O’Reilly Media, 2018.
[2] Google, “cAdvisor,” https://github.com/google/cadvisor, November
2014, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[3] Ivan Babrou, “Introducing eBPF Exporter,” https://blog.cloudflare.com
/introducing-ebpf exporter/, February 2022, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[4] J. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Xiang, X. Shi, X. Li, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu,
X. Yin, J. Wang, M. Xu, Y. Li, J. Yin, J. Song, Z. Li, and R. Nie,
“Network-centric distributed tracing with deepflow: Troubleshooting
your microservices in zero code,” in Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2023 Conference, ser. ACM SIGCOMM ’23.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 420–437.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604823
[5] CNCF, “Kubernetes,” https://kubernetes.io/, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[6] CNCF, “OpenTelemetry,” https://opentelemetry.io/, Accessed 2023.
[7] Facebook, “Katran,” https://github.com/facebookincubator/katran, May
2018, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[8] Google, “Extending the Kernel with eBPF : Android Open Source
Project,” https://source.android.com/docs/core/architecture/kernel/bpf,
accessed on May 1, 2023.
[9] S. McCanne and V. Jacobson, “The BSD Packet Filter: A New Archi-
tecture for User-level Packet Capture,” in USENIX winter, vol. 46, 1993.
[10] J. Levin and T. A. Benson, “ViperProbe: Rethinking Microservice
Observability with eBPF,” in 2020 IEEE 9th International Conference
on Cloud Networking (CloudNet), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[11] M. Song, Q. Liu, and H. E., “A Mirco-Service Tracing System Based
on Istio and Kubernetes,” in 2019 IEEE 10th International Conference
on Software Engineering and Service Science, 2019, pp. 613–616.
[12] Thrivikraman,
V.
R.
Dixit,
N.
R.
S,
V.
K.
Gowda,
S.
K.
Vasudevan, and S. Kalambur, “MiSeRTrace: Kernel-level Request
Tracing
for
Microservice
Visibility,”
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.14076
[13] C. Cassagnes, L. Trestioreanu, C. Joly, and R. State, “The rise of
eBPF for non-intrusive performance monitoring,” in NOMS 2020-2020
IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium.
IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–7.
[14] Grafana Labs, “Grafana,” https://grafana.com/, accessed on May 1,
2023.
[15] Lyft, “Envoy,” https://www.envoyproxy.io, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[16] The Linux Documentation Project, “The /proc Filesystem,” https://tldp
.org/LDP/Linux-Filesystem-Hierarchy/html/proc.html, 2004, accessed
on May 1, 2023.
[17] L. Jackson, “Debugging microservices: Lessons from google, facebook,
lyft,” https://thenewstack.io/debugging-microservices-lessons-from-
google-facebook-lyft/, 2017, accessed on May 1, 2023.
[18] Opentelemetry, “OTEL Demo,” https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/dem
o/, accessed on May 1, 2023.
2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC): SAC Cloud Computing, Networking and Storage Track
1985
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:23:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
