

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 
Research on A Lightweight Service Mesh 
Architecture Using eBPF
Yukai Tan,  
China Telecom 
China, Beijing 
tanyk6@chinatelecom.cn 
 
Zeya Zhu 
China Telecom 
China, Beijing 
zhuzy13@chinatelecom.cn 
 
Shuo Quan 
China Telecom 
China, Beijing 
quansh@chinatelecom.cn 
 
Shen Gao 
China Telecom 
China, Beijing 
gaos13@chinatelecom.cn
Abstract—Many applications deployed in the cloud are 
typically refactored as widgets in microservices, and these 
components run as containers in a Kubernetes environment. The 
containers then run on clusters of physical servers that 
interoperate with the data center network.  
With this deployment, a large number of microservice 
containers running comes with resource consumption. The 
prevailing management architecture of microservices deepens 
this resource consumption on physical servers and increases 
network latency. We believe that this scenario could be further 
optimized. 
In this paper, we argue for an improved service mesh 
architecture design (compared to the traditional one). It reduces 
the resource consumption and improves the performance of 
deployed microservice applications, while providing some end-to-
end visibility to debug problems that occur in microservices. We 
present the design and provide preliminary implementation 
details using eBPF technology to illustrate the feasibility of the 
system. 
Keywords-component: eBPF, service mesh, micro service 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
As virtualized applications evolve towards microservices, 
it is important for cloud providers to be able to deploy efficient 
microservices applications on the cloud at a lower cost. 
Microservices technology can help developers manage 
applications more easily and can deploy and update 
applications faster. It can also help organizations scale 
applications more easily and can meet customer needs faster. 
Cloud-native applications may consist of a large number of 
microservices, 
and 
a 
large 
number 
of 
microservice 
deployments suffer from three problems: 1) different 
programming language implementations 2) belonging to 
different tenants and 3)  thousands of application instances. In 
this case, some microservices frameworks such as Spring 
Cloud, Dubbo, etc. implement various common semantic 
features needed for distributed system communication though: 
such as load balancing and service discovery. But it is actually 
very complex, such as Spring Cloud, aggregates many 
components. So in practice, the use of the above microservices 
framework will find a number of problems: invasive, high 
upgrade costs, complex architecture, high learning costs, the 
inability to do programming language-independent and so on. 
On this basis, a new architecture called service mesh, 
which can decouple from business and mainly solve the 
communication between microservices and microservices in 
complex network topology, has emerged. Its current form is 
generally a lightweight network agent and is deployed with 
applications in a side-car agent mode, while being transparent 
to business applications. service mesh technology is widely 
promoted for use as a configurable infrastructure for 
microservice applications. 
There are two issues to be aware of when using service 
mesh technology. First, current service mesh architectures 
commonly use the side car model. The resource overhead 
(memory, CPU, etc.) of edge carts is a big challenge for edge 
cloud application deployment. The second is how to get end-
to-end visibility in a complex service mesh architecture? 
There are two main challenges in trying to foptimize these 
two issues. Firstly, the service mesh implementation in the 
edge car model integrates several features, such as elastic links, 
traffic management, observability and transparency, into the 
edge car agent implementation. This also makes the agent 
consume huge resources when a large number of side car 
agents are running on the host. The second is that to achieve 
end-to-end observability in such a complex system requires 
tracing and data analysis of the host kernel network stack. 
In this paper, we use the eBPF technique to implement the 
core functionality of the edge carriage down to the host kernel 
implementation and eliminate the edge carriage proxy 
mechanism. 
Compared 
with 
existing 
techniques, 
this 
implementation enables the edge carriage function to be 
implemented in the kernel with less overhead, and also 
reduces the packet path for packets to be forwarded between 
proxies and proxies for the purpose of reducing latency. A new 
detection tool can also be implemented to monitor packet 
traffic. The detection tool runs in the kernel state, and the 
traced data is processed and sent directly up to the user state. 
2023 4th International Conference on Computer Engineering and Application (ICCEA)
979-8-3503-4754-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
52
2023 4th International Conference on Computer Engineering and Application (ICCEA) | 979-8-3503-4754-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCEA58433.2023.10135394
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:43:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
II. RELATED WORK 
A. the eBPF technigh introduction 
eBPF[1], known as extended Berkeley Packet Filter, is a 
technology embedded in the Linux kernel that allows 
sandboxed programs to run in kernel space (e.g. ring-0). It can 
be used to enhance and extend kernel functionality without 
loading any additional kernel modules and without recompiling 
the kernel in a safe and secure manner. 
The eBPF programs can run on hook points in the Linux 
kernel, with functions covering XDP, TC, Probe, Sockets, etc. 
Each function point can implement kernel-state tampering 
behavior by triggering special events 
B. Service network research introduction 
As mentioned above, service mesh technology emerged 
from the development of microservices. Figure 1 shows the 
architecture of Istio [1], nowadays the mainstream service  
mesh open source project. 
 
Figure1. Istio[1] service mesh architecture 
Some academic research in cloud computing scenario has 
now used the idea of microservices and service mesh. 
[3]Sedghpour and Townend detailed the current situation of 
service mesh and the future direction of development. [4] Kang 
and Shin introduced the possible security problems of the 
mainstream service mesh technology and proposed a solution 
for the new architecture. In [5] Song and Liu pointed out the 
importance of fault tracing and locating capability in complex 
service mesh architectures. An approach to optimize the 
traceability of microservices is proposed in the paper. [6] Used 
a novel service mesh control plane architecture to improve the 
efficient and economical deployment of service meshes on 
edge clouds. 
Although the application of service mesh in cloud 
computing is expected to be studied in the future, few studies 
on the technology are currently reported. 
Existing work has optimized the service mesh, making it 
usability-enhancing. However, none of these studies have 
considered how to effectively reduce latency and lower system 
overhead in complex microservice network environments as 
well as enhancements to service mesh scenarios in terms of 
operations and maintenance. To fill these gaps, this paper 
optimizes the current Service mesh architecture with eBPF 
techniques to achieve enhancements in network latency and 
observability. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT 
A. Experimental Topology 
The experimental topology is shown in Figure 2, where we 
use a total of three physical nodes to simulate a cloud 
environment and deploy a Kubernetes cluster. From this, we 
create a basic environment to meet the deployment of service 
mesh. On top of this environment, we deploy two sets of 
service mesh services, the first set of service mesh services 
with conventional architecture and the second set of service 
mesh services optimized by us. 
 
Figure2. Experimental Topology 
B. Hardware Setup 
The experimental environment for this paper uses three 
DELL R740 servers, each with the following main 
configurations 
 
2 x Intel Xeon Silver 4214R 2.4GHz 
 
256GB of RAM 
 
2 x 4TB hard disk space 
 
2 x 10Gbps NIC 
In 
this 
article, 
Huawei 
CloudEngine 
S5731-H 
optoelectronic hybrid switch is used to implement network 
communication between three servers, and the configuration 
of the switch is 
 
282/480Mpps packet forwarding rate 
 
758Gbps/7.58Tbps switching capacity 
 
20 Gigabit optical SFPs, 4 optical 10 Gigabit SFP+, 4 
10 Gigabit SFP+ 
53
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:43:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
C. Software Setting 
In this paper, Ubuntu 18.04 operating system with kernel 
version 5.4.0-65-generic was installed on three servers. the 
GTP5G module was installed on top of the operating system 
kernel to support the forwarding of GTP-U protocol data. The 
software configuration on top of the operating system is shown 
in Table 1. 
Table 1. Service mesh software running environment 
Environment configuration 
items 
Configuration information 
Compiler environment 
 
gcc v7.3.0 
 
Golang v1.14.4 
linux/amd64 
Database 
MongoDB v4.4 
Software dependencies 
git, cmake, autoconf, libtool, pkg-
config, libmnl-dev,  libyaml-dev 
Network configuration 
 
enables ipv4 forwarding 
 
enable DNAT mode for 
data networks 
 
Disable system firewall 
Container orchestration 
management system 
Kubernetes v1.25.0 
Container image repository 
Harbor v2.6.0 
IV. SOLUTION DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, we analyze the service mesh according to 
the challenges encountered in edge computing scenarios and 
propose feasible novel architectures. 
In distributed architectures, control and logic are usually 
designed separately. The same idea is used in the service mesh 
architecture: the control module implements functions such as 
monitoring, logging, flow limiting, fusing, service registration, 
protocol adaptation conversion, etc. The service module 
implements the business logic functions. The control module 
mentioned above is called a side car in the traditional service 
mesh architecture. 
While the sidecar model has great advantages over 
reconfiguring applications, it runs as a container in the host and 
does not provide perfect isolation between the application and 
the data plane. This leads to these limitations as described 
below. 
Intrusiveness: The sidecar proxy must be "injected" into the 
application by modifying the application's Kubernetes pod spec, 
and requires redirecting traffic from the application in the pod 
to sidecar. therefore installing or upgrading sidecar requires 
restarting the application pod, which can be disruptive to 
workloads. This can be disruptive to the workload. 
Underutilization of resources: Since each sidecar agent is 
only used for the relevant workload in its pod, the CPU and 
memory resources of the sidecar must be conservatively 
allocated for each pod's worst-case scenario. This results in 
significant 
resource 
reservation, 
which 
can 
lead 
to 
underutilization of resources across the cluster. 
Traffic disruption: Traffic capture and HTTP processing are 
typically performed by sidecar, and these operations are 
computationally expensive and may break applications whose 
implementations are not fully compatible with the HTTP 
protocol. 
High latency: Communication between sidecars and 
applications, and between sidecars and sidecars, also increases 
the time cost of microservice communication, making the path 
of packets through the kernel stack longer. 
We design a modification of the host's kernel network stack 
to remove the service mesh architecture's dependence on the 
sidecar proxy. To achieve this, we designed a "kernel sidecar" 
based on the eBPF technology implementation. This design 
retains the advantages of being non-intrusive to the application, 
free from the language and technical constraints of the 
application service, and separating control and logic. It also 
takes advantage of the fact that eBPF runs in the kernel to 
reduce overhead and shorten the path of packets through the 
kernel stack. 
A. Side Car 
The most important function of the side car is to control 
the traffic coming out of or into the individual microservices. 
[5] Cilium was the first to propose a kernel network stack 
optimization scheme. The design of this paper refers to Cilium 
and uses eBPF technology in the kernel to achieve the effect of 
replacing the traditional side car by processing, hijacking, and 
forwarding capabilities of packets. 
Specifically, the metrics that this part wants to optimize are 
the path length of packets in the host network stack, and the 
CPU and memory resources occupied by the side car agent. 
 
Figure3. Optimized service mesh architecture 
Hijacking of traffic is done mainly through the eBPF 
program hook bind system call. eBPF program hijacks the 
bind system call and modifies the address. The hijacked traffic 
is forwarded to the eBPF program running in the kernel for 
processing. 
Unlike iptables, which can set rules for each netns 
individually, the eBPF program attaches to the specified hook 
point and it takes effect for the whole system. In Kubernetes, 
except for the case of host network, each Pod has its own netns, 
and each netns has a unique cookie, so we save the 
corresponding netns cookie of the Pod that needs to use eBPF 
to complete traffic hijacking in the cookie_map The eBPF 
program decides whether to modify the bind address by 
determining whether the netns cookie of the current socket is 
in the cookie_map. 
As shown above, the hijacked traffic will be forwarded to 
the eBPF1 program. eBPF1 replaces the capability of the side 
car proxy in the traditional scheme. eBPF1 will use mTLS 
54
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:43:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
 
 
encryption to authenticate, identify and forward the traffic for 
security purposes. The new architecture bypasses the tcp/ip 
layer and the protocol processing steps at the lower layers. 
This makes the path of traffic through the kernel protocol 
stack shorter and reduces the processing time of traffic in the 
kernel. Also as the eBPF program in the kernel replaces the 
huge number of edge carriage agents in the user state. This 
frees up memory and CPU resources that would otherwise be 
consumed by the large number of edge carriage agents. 
The new edge-vehicle-less service mesh architecture, 
featuring smaller resource overhead and faster latency, makes 
it possible to deploy service mesh services in edge clouds or 
cloud computing nodes with fewer computational resources, 
driving larger-scale applications of service mesh in the future. 
B. Observability and tracking 
We are designed to examine the host's network stack to 
gather metrics on the performance of each connection. As well 
as event tracing for some problematic links. The metrics enable 
fast identification of bad performance and the traces enable 
fine-grained visibility and fast debugging. 
Trace collection module: The trace module needs to be 
deployed in different layers of the network kernel stack. Calls 
to kernel functions for packet operations trigger the eBPF 
program of the trace function to obtain information about the 
packet and record it. In more design details, we plan different 
dimensions of the packet, such as IP quintet, layer name, 
timestamp, process name, thread name, CPU used to process 
the traffic, etc. Selectively collecting and processing a small 
portion of packets based on different dimensions can greatly 
reduce storage and memory overhead. It can effectively 
increase the efficiency when the application traffic is at its peak. 
Data processing module:Draws the traffic topology of the 
service mesh based on the information processed by different 
modules. To visually restore the behavior and characteristics 
between microservices. See the traffic calls between 
microservices. 
V. Conclusions 
In this paper, we propose and implement an optimization 
scheme based on the mainstream service mesh architecture. It 
addresses the problems of resource consumption and high 
latency in complex network environments caused by the need 
to deploy a large number of side-car agent containers in 
traditional architectures. By sinking the edge-vehicle agent to 
the host kernel state, it avoids frequent switching between user 
and kernel states and uses eBPF technology to perform 
customized operations in specific functions of the kernel to 
bypass the traffic and shorten the path in the kernel. The above 
issues are optimized while keeping the original functional logic 
unchanged. Also in terms of observable lines and traces. The 
use of eBPF technology to trace finer-grained network packet 
information solves to some extent the problems of observability 
and fast debugging of complex network environments for 
microservices. The new service mesh architecture proposed in 
this paper improves the resource utilization and availability of 
microservice applications in various scenarios, reduces the 
usage threshold and usage cost, and provides a basis for 
microservice promotion and application. Especially in the edge 
scenarios with fewer resources, the availability and ease of use 
of the service mesh are greatly improved. 
In addition, further deployment and verification are needed 
in future work in terms of network security and reliability. 
REFERENCES 
[1]Isitio. https://istio.io/ 
[2]eBPF. https://ebpf.io/ 
[3]M. R. S. Sedghpour and P. Townend, "Service Mesh and eBPF-Powered 
Microservices: A Survey and Future Directions," 2022 IEEE 
International Conference on Service-Oriented System Engineering 
(SOSE), 
Newark, 
CA, 
USA, 
2022, 
pp. 
176-184, 
doi: 
10.1109/SOSE55356.2022.00027. 
[4]M. Kang, J. -S. Shin and J. Kim, "Protected Coordination of Service Mesh 
for Container-Based 3-Tier Service Traffic," 2019 International 
Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, 2019, pp. 427-429, doi: 10.1109/ICOIN.2019.8718120. 
[5]M. Song, Q. Liu and H. E., "A Mirco-Service Tracing System Based on 
Istio and Kubernetes," 2019 IEEE 10th International Conference on 
Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), Beijing, China, 
2019, pp. 613-616, doi: 10.1109/ICSESS47205.2019.9040783. 
[6]Y. Li, D. Zeng, L. Chen, L. Gu, W. Ma and F. Gao, "Cost Efficient Service 
Mesh Controller Placement for Edge Native Computing," GLOBECOM 
2022 - 2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, 
2022, 
pp. 
1368-1372, 
doi: 
10.1109/GLOBECOM48099.2022.10000996. 
[7]GitHub 
- 
cilium/cilium: 
eBPF-based 
Networking, 
Security, 
and 
Observability 
 
55
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:43:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
