

--- PAGE 1 ---
.
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3651890.3672254
.
.
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without
Application Modification
SACHIN ASHOK, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
.
I'm a Graduate Student at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign where I'm co-advised by
Prof. Radhika Mial and Prof. Brighten Godfrey. Previously, I was a Research Fellow at Microso
Research India, where I worked with Dr. Venkat Padmanabhan. I'm quite broadly interested in
Systems and Networking.
.
VIPUL HARSH, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
.
BRIGHTEN GODFREY, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
.
RADHIKA MITTAL, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
.
SRINIVASAN PARTHASARATHY, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, United States
.
LARISA SHWARTZ, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, United States
.
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
.
IBM Research
.
PDF Download
3651890.3672254.pdf
05 January 2026
Total Citations: 4
Total Downloads: 2968
.
.
.
.
Published: 04 August 2024
.
.
Citation in BibTeX format
.
.
ACM SIGCOMM '24: ACM SIGCOMM
2024 Conference
August 4 - 8, 2024
NSW, Sydney, Australia
.
.
Conference Sponsors:
SIGCOMM
ACM SIGCOMM '24: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (August 2024)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672254
ISBN: 9798400706141
.



--- PAGE 2 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request
Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
Sachin Ashok
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
sachina3@illinois.edu
Vipul Harsh
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
vharsh2@illinois.edu
P. Brighten Godfrey
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign and Broadcom
pbg@illinois.edu
Radhika Mittal
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
radhikam@illinois.edu
Srinivasan Parathasarathy
IBM Research
spartha@us.ibm.com
Larisa Schwartz
IBM Research
lshwart@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Monitoring and debugging modern cloud-based applications is chal-
lengingsinceevenasingleAPIcallcaninvolvemanyinterdependent
distributed microservices. To provide observability for such complex
systems, distributed tracing frameworks track request flow across
the microservice call tree. However, such solutions require instru-
menting every component of the distributed application to add and
propagate tracing headers, which has slowed adoption. This paper
explores whether we can trace requests without any application in-
strumentation, which we refer to as request trace reconstruction. To
thatend,wedevelopTraceWeaver,asystemthatincorporatesreadily
availableinformationfromproductionsettings(e.g.,timestamps)and
testenvironments(e.g.,callgraphs)toreconstructrequesttraceswith
usefully high accuracy. At the heart of TraceWeaver is a reconstruc-
tion algorithm that uses request-response timestamps to effectively
prune the search space for mapping requests and applies statistical
timing analysis techniques to reconstruct traces. Evaluation with
(1) benchmark microservice applications and (2) a production mi-
croservice dataset demonstrates that TraceWeaver can achieve a
high accuracy of ~90% and can be meaningfully applied towards
multiple use cases (e.g., finding slow services and A/B testing).
CCS CONCEPTS
• Networks →Network monitoring; Network measurement.
KEYWORDS
Non-Intrusive, Distributed Tracing, Graph Analysis, Microservices
ACM Reference Format:
Sachin Ashok, Vipul Harsh, P. Brighten Godfrey, Radhika Mittal, Srinivasan
Parathasarathy, and Larisa Schwartz. 2024. TraceWeaver: Distributed Re-
quest Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification. In ACM
SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM ’24), August 4–8, 2024, Sydney,
NSW, Australia. ACM, Sydney, Australia, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3651890.3672254
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0614-1/24/08
https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672254
1
INTRODUCTION
Modern “cloud native” applications built using a microservice archi-
tecture split their functionality into small logical units, which can be
deployed as containers and automatically scaled (i.e., dynamically
replicated to meet demand) with cluster management platforms
like Kubernetes. Compared to monolithic applications, individual
microservices are more manageable to build and maintain, easier
to individually re-deploy in new versions, and easier to write in
different languages and frameworks. The result is that modern ap-
plications are highly distributed, potentially involving hundreds or
even over a thousand [47] individual microservice instances.
Unfortunately, such highly distributed applications are challeng-
ing to operate and debug [16, 18]. For example, an operator may wish
to determine which service is responsible for inflating latency for a
certain user-facing API call for a specific subset of traffic. But an API
call may produce children, i.e., further API calls to other services is-
sued in order to handle the parent call. The resulting tree of API calls
may ultimately comprise many stages of backend calls to various
services, making it hard to isolate the component responsible for a
particular problem. For such troubleshooting, it is indispensible to
have a request trace, which we define as a record of each request
(API call) into a microservice, and recursively all requests that it
spawns (children, children of children, etc.) to other microservices.
That is, each record within the trace includes a start and finish time
(known as a “span”) and pointers to its child request records.
DistributedtracingframeworkssuchasJaeger[35]andZipkin[63],
along with commercial solutions like Instana [33] and Datadog [23]
and earlier research proposals like XTrace [27], help developers deal
with the above problem. Because network communication is exter-
nally visibile, it is easy for such frameworks to automatically log
requests between microservices as isolated events, i.e., individual
spans. But to produce full request traces, such systems require appli-
cation developers to instrument their code, carrying identifiers that
associate each request with its children, which is known as context
propagation. Even within a single service, instrumentation is needed
at a module level to track execution flow, requiring a context object
to be passed as an argument when modules are invoked [44].
This application-level code modification is required for request
tracing, no matter what underlying communication framework is
used by the application (Apache Thrift [1], gRPC [2], etc.). Only the
application-level modules can track the execution flow (i.e. which
828
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License.



--- PAGE 3 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
incoming request spawns which outgoing requests). This context-
specific information cannot be automatically made available to the
underlying communication frameworks without any application
support. The code modification for context propagation can involve
a considerable investment of time, given dozens or hundreds of
microservices written by different teams. Some microservices can
be more challenging (e.g., legacy apps) or completely impossible
to modify (e.g., proprietary, binary code), resulting in incomplete
request traces. Even when feasible, adding tracing instrumentation
is often buried under a long list of feature requests. This is one major
factor1 that has limited adoption.
In this paper, we pose the question: to what extent can we accu-
rately produce request traces without instrumenting applications?
We refer to this problem as non-intrusive request tracing.
There is a large body of work on distributed tracing, that tackles
a different, but related, problem – inferring that service X tends
to depend on service Y, either using individual span-level informa-
tion [15, 20, 48] or relying on request traces generated via context
propagation [21]. In contrast, with non-intrusive request tracing,
we seek finer-grained information about which specific requests re-
sulted in which other specific requests, without relying on any appli-
cation support (context propagation). This is usually more valuable
(e.g., to debug problems with specific requests, or important groups
of requests) but also fundamentally more challenging. Applications
concurrently serve many incoming requests, making it difficult to
determine which incoming requests led to which child requests.
Non-intrusiverequesttracingthereforeremainsanunsolvedprob-
lem that is highly desired by industry [14]. A few existing proposals
do attempt to tackle this problem [51, 54], but make several simpli-
fying assumptions about the application threading models, which
severely restricts their applicability. Our work, in contrast, seeks a
more general solution that is not tied to a specific threading model.
Our approach is based on two observations. First, while it might
not be possible to construct fully accurate request traces without
leveraging application support or without making restrictive as-
sumptions about the application’s threading model [51, 54], even ap-
proximate requesttracing(withgoodenoughaccuracy)canbehighly
useful. If accuracy is reasonably high, or if the user is presented with
a small number of possible traces, one of which is indeed correct, this
can dramatically accelerate performance debugging compared with
having no information about a request’s trace. Moreover, many pro-
filing tasks don’t require every individual trace to be reconstructed
correctly; often, users want to understand a sub-population of re-
quests – for example, what is the per-service processing latency for
requests in the worst 5% end-to-end latency bracket? Or, what is the
typical performance profile of a high profile user’s latency-sensitive
query type? These questions may be meaningfully answered even
if individual traces have some occasional error.
Our second observation is that modern microservice environ-
ments provide new avenues for collecting useful information that
we can leverage for non-intrusive request tracing. In particular, even
though we treat the application itself as unmodifiable, we can see
detailed information about the communication in and out of the
application, e.g. through service mesh sidecars or eBPF hooks. We
1Others include cost of commercial solutions and performance overhead.
detail how such tools can be effectively used to obtain span infor-
mation (map an incoming request to the corresponding outgoing
response, and get the request-response timestamps). Moreover, mod-
ern packaging of applications for Kubernetes environments makes it
feasible to spin up applications in test environments, where they can
be observed in a controlled way. We can leverage such test environ-
ments to infer the call graph, i.e. the sequence of backend services
that an incoming request at a given service invokes.
We develop a system, TraceWeaver, that obtains the above infor-
mation(spantimings,callgraph)andusesitfornon-intrusiverequest
tracing with usefully high accuracy. TraceWeaver is centered around
a trace reconstruction algorithm that combines constraints obtained
from the knowledge of the call graph and span timings to prune the
candidate search space, along with soft statistical timing heuristics
to map the incoming requests at each service with likely potential
child requests. In particular, we estimate the timing distributions
between parent and child requests, use it to score feasible parent-
childmappings,andthenselectthehighest-scoringfeasiblemapping
by encoding it as a maximum independent set problem. But there
is a chicken-and-egg problem – how do we even know the timing
distribution between parent and child requests without knowing the
mapping? We tackle this using an iterative joint estimation process
to discover both the timing distribution and the mappings, which
quickly converges to an accurate result. Finally, we augment our ap-
proachtoaccommodatealimitedextentofdynamicsinthecallgraph.
InourevaluationusingapplicationsfromtheDeathStarBench[28]
benchmarking suite, we find that the best performing baseline ap-
proach has 70% accuracy in reconstructing traces, while our tech-
niques boost this to 93%. Our preliminary analysis on a production
dataset from Alibaba [12] running several customer-facing applica-
tions showcases a high accuracy in the range of 80%-99% even under
variable, high system loads. Even though this is imperfect, Trace-
Weaver’s trace reconstruction may already be useful for a variety of
tasks. We demonstrate two use cases: determining which back-end
service caused a particular subset of API calls to be slow, and detect-
ing changes in a service’s performance profile while A/B testing.
However, we believe this is not the end of the story: we expect
accuracy could be pushed increasingly high, in increasingly difficult
environments, by incorporating more information into our recon-
struction framework (e.g., commonalities in request contents). We
describe such necessary and promising directions in future work
(§7). Overall, we believe non-intrusive request tracing is a promising
way to provide developers with a “free” debugging tool, without
additional effort on their part. This work does not raise any ethical
concerns.
2
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
2.1
Terminology
We refer to Figure 1 (representing a microservice based application)
to explain the terms used throughout the paper.
Span. A span is a request-response pair that represents one exe-
cution of an API call at a running service instance, with metadata
comprising caller, callee, start time, end time, and API endpoint (a
specific URL where clients send requests to interact with a server’s
functions[56]).Intheaboveexample, (𝑅1,𝑅8), (𝑅2,𝑅5) etc.,arespans.
829



--- PAGE 4 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
B
R1
R8
R2
R5
R6
R7
R3
R4
R’
3
R’
4
A
D
E
C
Figure 1: Call graph for an example application.
Call graph. At each service X, the call graph describes which other
services are contacted by X to answer an incoming request. In Fig-
ure 1, as per the call graph, A talks to B and C to handle requests.
Dependencyorder.AteachserviceX,werefertotheorderinwhich
backend calls are made as the dependency order at X. For the above
example, the dependency order at A is the following – to respond to
an incoming request, A calls B and C sequentially and once it receives
a response from C, it returns a response. Similarly, the call graph at
B is – to answer a request, B calls D and E in parallel and returns a
response once it hears back from D and E.
Parent-child relationship. A parent-child relationship 𝑅1 →𝑅2 in-
dicates that in the course of processing 𝑅1, the microservice invoked
𝑅2. In the above example, in order to process and respond to the in-
coming request 𝑅1, A calls service B (𝑅2). Once it gets a response 𝑅5
from B, it calls service C (𝑅6). Once it receives the response 𝑅7 from
C, it does some processing of its own and returns the response 𝑅8 to
the user. This makes the requests 𝑅2 and 𝑅6 children of 𝑅1. Likewise,
at Service B, follow-up requests 𝑅3 and 𝑅′
3 (′ implies parallel calls)
are children of the corresponding request 𝑅2.
Request trace. A trace of a request 𝑟includes 𝑟and its response
along with the records of the full tree of its descendants. The record
for each request within the trace includes its span information (i.e.,
the caller, callee, API endpoint, start, and end time) and pointers to its
childrequestrecords.Intheaboveexample,therootspanstartswhen
request 𝑅1 arrives at front-end service node A (generally invoked by
an external client), and ends when the corresponding response 𝑅8 is
returned. The remaining spans involve subsequent request-response
pairs, e.g 𝑅2-𝑅5, 𝑅3-𝑅4, etc. which are child spans of the 𝑅1-𝑅8 pair.
What is visible? Of the information listed above, we can readily
obtain the span metadata (through eBPF, service mesh sidecars, etc).
We can further infer the call graph (from production data or isolated
test environments). We detail how such information can be obtained
in §5. However, the parent-child relationships, and therefore the
request trace, are not visible. That is the crux of the problem in this
paper, as we discuss in more detail next.
2.2
Request Tracing
The key problem we target in this paper is whether we can construct
complete request traces, i.e. map each request arriving at each service
with the corresponding child requests. In the context of our example,
we wish to map 𝑅1 to 𝑅2 and 𝑅6 at 𝐴; 𝑅2 to 𝑅3 and 𝑅′
3 at 𝐵, and so on.
We refer to this problem of obtaining individual request traces for
all requests as request tracing.
2.2.1
Why is request tracing useful? Tracking the journey of a re-
quest through several components of a distributed application, that
work in tandem to generate a response, is critical for various debug-
ging and troubleshooting tasks. For example, let’s say an operator is
interested in knowing which microservice is majorly contributing to
the delay for a small set of high priority client requests. To produce
the answer, one must be able to map which backend requests were
made to produce the response, for each of those high priority re-
quests at each service. We detail more such use cases in §6, including
A/B testing.
2.2.2
Why is instrumentation-based request tracing hard? One way
to keep track of a request’s journey through the application is to
instrument all service components so that a unique context identifier,
attached to an incoming request, is carried onto any requests to
backend services that result from the incoming request. For example,
𝑅1 carries a unique identifier that service 𝐴propagates to 𝑅2, from
which service 𝐵propagates to𝑅3, and so on. This is known as context
propagation, and has been extensively explored through an active
line of research [27, 35, 36, 39, 52, 63]. Given support for context
propagation, spans from each microservice can be grouped by their
context identifiers and spans with the same identifier can be stitched
together to form a request trace.
Such context propagation must be inherently supported in the
application logic, since only the application can track the execution
flow across function boundaries. It cannot be provided as a plug-
in feature by the underlying frameworks (e.g. the service mesh or
RPC frameworks) which do not have the required visibility into the
application logic and its internal execution flow (see Figure 2a).
Although copying identifiers seems simple at first glance, it in-
volves major practical hurdles: all software components, maintained
by different teams or different vendors, have to appropriately prop-
agate context. This involves agreeing on an API to use consistently,
but more importantly, instrumenting internal microservice code to
carry identifiers across function calls and data structures.
OpenTelemetry [43] defines a standard API and distributed trac-
ing frameworks like Jaeger and Zipkin (and other commercial solu-
tions) provide instrumentation tools for context propagation, either
in common libraries or via hooks that developers can explicitly call.
However, it is up to individual app developers to use the APIs or
leverage the available tools, and context propagation continues to be
a difficult task that increases app development burden. As a result, it
has seen limited adoption, especially for legacy applications which
require significant developer effort to modify existing code (only
20% of enterprise applications, as of 2021 [53]). Furthermore, an
application could use proprietary third party service components
which may not be possible to instrument.
If software components have not yet been instrumented to prop-
agate context, one could use program analysis techniques to auto-
matically modify software components so that they pass request
context. This approach, taken by systems such as [25], is error-prone
and still requires developers to go through the changes suggested by
the tool and approve them. Other approaches, such as Border-Patrol
[37], require middleware instrumentation to modify event streams
to run them sequentially at specific observation points for precise
mapping, which results in high-performance penalties (10-15%) and
makes them infeasible.
2.2.3
Non-intrusive request tracing. In the absence of context propa-
gation, another strategyto construct request traces isto infer it based
830



--- PAGE 5 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
on the available information. Specifically, one can match incoming
requests at a service, say A, to outbound requests from A based on
span metadata, thread-level data, or header parameters. One benefit
of this approach is that it requires very little from app developers.
This approach, which we refer to as non-intrusive request tracing, is
the subject of our work.
2.2.4
Existing approaches for non-intrusive request tracing. Existing
works such as vPath [54] and DeepFlow [51] solve non-intrusive re-
quest tracing for a restrictive set of applications assuming a specific
threading model for the application. Specifically, for the threading
model, it is assumed that there are no hand-offs between threads
and no asynchronous calls, so that every outgoing request from a
thread can be mapped to the most recent network event (request/
response) picked up by that thread. Using this assumption, vPath
(and DeepFlow) can record the thread 𝑡that picked up a request 𝑟𝑖𝑛
and for any subsequent request 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡sent by 𝑡, until 𝑡picks up the
next request, associates 𝑟𝑖𝑛with 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡. While this scheme is effective
for applications that follow this threading model, these assumptions
do not hold for several common application types – applications
that hand over requests to communication threads of RPC libraries
such as Thrift [1] or gRPC [2], or applications which employ event-
driven, asynchronous communication to perform non-blocking I/O
operations such as in Node.js [8] apps. For example, as illustrated
in Figure 2b, due to non-blocking disk I/O behavior (1b, 2b) in the
second case, the “next” (1st) outgoing event is an outgoing backend
request (1c) due to the 1st request (1a) even though 2nd request is
the last outstanding incoming request (2a). vPath (and DeepFlow)
would incorrectly map 2a to 1c in this case.
2.2.5
Employing sidecars, eBPF hooks, or having access to the call-
graph alone is insufficient. While infrastructure technologies like
service meshes [34] and eBPF [26] can be valuable for observability,
they are insufficient to solve the tracing challenge. Service mesh side-
cars handle communication functions [13] such as load balancing,
and retries and can intercept all traffic, enabling request observation/
modification without altering the app code. eBPF, on the other hand,
can run programs in the OS kernel, allowing monitoring/ manipu-
lation of system operations, such as network syscalls, with minimal
overhead. Despite their usefulness, they alone cannot solve the trac-
ing problem because if a sidecar (or an eBPF program) adds custom
headers to an incoming request (e.g., as shown in Figure 2a), there
is no guarantee that the application will propagate these headers
to related outgoing backend requests. Without the propagation of
these headers, linking the requests becomes impossible. Addition-
ally, merely having access to the call graph – the set of backend
services and their order queried by the application for a request – is
inadequate as well. This limitation arises because multiple requests
can concurrently traverse the same call graph, making it challenging
to disambiguate requests solely based on call graph knowledge.
2.2.6
Our approach. We seek a more general solution for non-
intrusive request tracing that is not restricted to specific threading
models. Our solution, TraceWeaver, obtains visible information (call
graph and span timings) using various avenues provided by mod-
ern microservice environments (e.g. eBPF hooks, sidecar proxies,
App Server 
(contents hidden)
time
Req. 1
Req. 2
Sidecar or 
RPC library 
(visible)
2a
1b 2b
2c
1c
Backend server
Possible mapping #1
2d
1d
Incoming 
requests
Child 
requests
1a
Child 
responses
Outgoing 
Responses
Async I/O 
1a
2a
Disk
2c
1c
1b
2b
Sync I/O
1a
2a
Disk
2c
1c
1b
2b
Possible mapping #2
Node.js
thread
Normal
thread
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Request forwarding chain shows how even a
proxy or RPC library cannot discern the right mapping (1
or 2) as it is buried in app logic. (b) Non-blocking I/O in the
second case (right) results in vPath/ DeepFlow’s assumption
(last incoming network event causing next outgoing network
event in a thread) to break.
test environments etc). It then applies a novel timing analysis algo-
rithm to construct approximate request traces from this information.
TraceWeaver can be applied to each service individually, and can
also co-exist with other solutions for non-intrusive request tracing
(e.g., if a partial trace is available because some services propagate
context or some services satisfy the assumptions of DeepFlow/vPath,
TraceWeaver could fill in the gaps to complete the trace).
2.3
Related Problems: How they differ?
Several works under the umbrella term “distributed tracing” solve a
variety of problems distinct from request tracing. One such problem,
thatmultipleexistingworkstrytotackle,istoobtaintheservice-level
dependencies such as service A calls service B to answer inbound
requestsatAbutnotvice-versa.Werefertothisproblemofobtaining
dependencies between services as “dependency mapping”. The Mys-
tery Machine [21] is a system for dependency mapping. It assumes
context propagation and uses the request-traces thus obtained to
derive a model of how services talk to each other. As discussed in
§2.2.2, context propagation is burdensome for developers and hence
has limited adoption in the real-world. Orion [20], Sherlock [15]
and WAP5 [48] also tackle dependency mapping – they take as in-
put span level data, and obtain the dependencies between services
via analyzing delays in network traffic between when A receives a
request and when A talks to B.
In contrast to dependency mapping, for request tracing, we seek
finer-grained request traces, linking a specific request inbound at
service A to another specific request outbound from A (and similarly
at other services). Request tracing is more valuable than dependency
mapping since request traces can be used to analyze performance
of a single request or, more generally, any subset of requests. At the
same time, disambiguating between far more numerous possibilities
831



--- PAGE 6 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Live Spans 
(via eBPF)
Full Traces
Call Graphs /
Test Spans
Call Graph
Inference
TraceWeaver
Distribution 
Generator
Batching 
Scheme
MIS Solver
Call Graph, 
Dependency Order
GMMs
Batches
0
3
2
Candidate 
Ranker
5
4
Preprocessing
(One-time)
Trace Reconstruction
(Ongoing)
Inputs
Ranked
Candidates
Iterate
Candidate 
Identifier
1
Output
Candidates
Figure 3: The distinct phases in TraceWeaver’s system.
for request traces for every single request is fundamentally more
challenging than finding which other services a particular service
depends on. We tried to repurpose one of the above dependency map-
ping systems, WAP5, for non-intrusive request tracing and found its
accuracy to be low (§6). Sherlock and Orion employ similar analysis,
hence we expect them to have the same problems as WAP5.
Many systems take as input request traces, and analyze them to
improve various aspects of the system. For instance, Snicket [17]
optimizes sampling of request traces based on developer queries for
efficientstorage. [62]useslogsfromservices,taggedwithidentifiers,
to learn models that can help in various storage related decisions.
DQBarge [22] injects critical system information (e.g. load) onto
requests, which is passed around so that services can optimize for
quality/performance trade-off. All of the above systems assume ca-
pabilities similar to context propagation, but they can be used in
conjunction with non-intrusive request tracing which can make
request-traces available for their analysis.
3
TRACEWEAVER OVERVIEW
We enumerate the components of TraceWeaver (Figure 3):
Obtaining the inputs. To reconstruct traces, TraceWeaver requires
live span data from running apps and the call graphs the spans follow,
along with the dependency order (§ 2.1). TraceWeaver uses eBPF
to hook onto networking syscalls (e.g., accept, recv, send, close) to
collect live span information (caller, callee, API endpoint, start time,
and end time). The call graphs and the dependency order can be pro-
vided directly by the operator (optional) or deduced by running tests
on spans collected in a test environment. §5 describes more details.
Preprocessing.Ifoperator-providedcallgraphsareavailable,Trace-
Weaver identifies dependencies by analyzing them. In their absence,
spans generated in a test environment are used. Using these spans,
TraceWeaver can learn two distinct types of dependencies regarding
the application at each service 𝑆: (a) call graph: which other backend
servicesdoes𝑆calland(b)dependencyorder:thesequenceinwhich𝑆
callsthesebackendservices.Thesedependenciesserveasconstraints
which allow TraceWeaver to identify candidate mappings (the set of
outgoing requests whose timings respect dependency requirements)
for each request. Note, the preprocessing is run once and re-run only
if the application is updated. We provide more details in §5.
Trace Reconstruction. Under large enough request arrival rates,
each incoming request at service 𝑆can map to many different can-
didate outgoing requests for each backend service 𝑆calls. Our trace
reconstruction algorithm (detailed in §4) scores and ranks these
candidates to find the best mapping.
Using the output. While the output traces can be inspected indi-
vidually for insights, learning aggregate statistics about application
performance is another class of use case that is extremely useful
in practice. For this, an operator specifies a filter which selects a
subset of mapped traces that collectively form an “aggregate” trace,
representing that subset’s behaviour. A large class of use cases which
leverage such aggregate traces can be derived from such a setup. For
example, analyzing subset of traces that suffer tail latency to identify
which straggler service(s) are responsible for delay inflation. An-
other interesting example is running an A/B test where comparing
the performance of a subset of traces that used version B instead of
A is useful. We showcase these use cases in §6.4.
Deployment modes. TraceWeaver allows for both offline and on-
line deployment modes. In offline mode, spans are collected and
stored to analyze on demand. In online mode, spans are passed to
a running TraceWeaver instance which constructs request traces in
real-time (detailed in §5.3).
4
TRACEWEAVER ALGORITHM
Inputs. Our reconstruction algorithm uses the following inputs (we
detail how we obtain them in §5):
(1) Span information comprising the request-response pairs (e.g.,
𝑅1-𝑅8 pair from Figure 1) and the timing information.
(2) The call graph and the dependency order at each service.
Assumptions. TraceWeaver makes the following assumptions: (i)
A parent span’s response is sent out only after all child spans finish
processing. (ii) Every successful request has a response or a comple-
tion acknowledgement. In other words, we assume request-response
behaviour, commonly enforced by REST and gRPC endpoints. (iii)
It is possible to know which unique call graph a given (completed)
request falls into (e.g., via API endpoint, unique header parameters).
(iv) Once identified, call graphs are either static with a well-defined
structure or can display dynamism by traversing only a subset of
the graph (e.g., due to caching, failures, or semantic reasons). We
handle this class of dynamism in §4.2. We leave tackling other forms
of dynamism, e.g., due to retries and quorums, to future work (§7).
For ease of exposition, we first describe our algorithm for the
scenario where all spans follow the same call graph, i.e., no dynamic
behaviour is induced due to caching or errors (§4.1), and then fold
dynamism into it (§4.2).
4.1
Reconstruction for Static Call Graphs
We refer to Figure 1 to describe our algorithm and Table 4.1 lists
all tunable parameters. For a given application, TraceWeaver de-
composes the problem of reconstructing an entire request trace into
solving independent optimization tasks at individual services i.e., in
832



--- PAGE 7 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
Parameters
value
Max. size of an optimization batch
B = 30
Max. candidates for any given span
K = 5
Max. GMM components for modeling delay distribution
C = 5
Number of buckets used to estimate delay mean and variance
R = 10
Table 1: Parameters used in TraceWeaver’s design.
Figure 1, mapping 𝑅1-𝑅8 to 𝑅2-𝑅5 at A is an independent optimiza-
tion task w.r.t mapping 𝑅2-𝑅5 to 𝑅3-𝑅4 at B. Also, given that 𝑅1 and
𝑅2 must be received and sent by the same container of a service, the
scope of each optimization task is limited to that granularity. Finally,
the independently mapped pieces of the request trace can be trivially
assembled in post-processing to form the full trace (since the outgo-
ing 𝑅2 at A and the incoming 𝑅2 at B are the same and can be linked).
In essence, at each service 𝑆, TraceWeaver receives a dynamic
number of spans (𝑀) per time window and uses the spans and call
graphs to do the following:
(1) Candidate identification: For each incoming span (a span whose
request arrives at 𝑆, is serviced by 𝑆, and its response departs 𝑆)
among the𝑀spans, find candidate mappings using span timings and
constraints derived from the call graph and the dependency order.
(2) Batching: Split the 𝑀spans into batches to restrict the scope of
joint optimization to individual batches. Careful splitting minimizes
the overlap of candidate mappings across spans in adjacent batches.
(3) Distribution generation: Estimate the “inter-span” time distri-
butions as per the dependency order between the services in the
call graph at 𝑆. In other words, if a dependency exists between 𝑅1
and 𝑅2 (or similarly, between 𝑅5 and 𝑅6), we estimate a probability
distribution for the time between those events. In general, these
probability distributions correspond to the time duration between
the reception of an incoming parent request (child response) at 𝑆
from a caller (callee) and the transmission of a dependent outgoing
child request (parent response) at 𝑆to a callee (caller).
(4) Candidate ranking: Within each batch, score and rank candidate
mappings for each span based on how well the timings of the candi-
date spans align, calculated using probability distributions from (3).
(5) Joint optimization: Solve each batch jointly, i.e., find an assign-
ment of incoming spans to one candidate mapping each (by choosing
among available candidate mappings), in such a way that the cumu-
lative probability score of the batch of spans is maximized.
(6) Iteration: Repeat steps 3, 4 and 5 by feeding in the mappings
from step 5 to step 3 to improve time distributions (step 3), candidate
rankings (step 4), and the final assignment (step 5).
Step 1: Identifying Candidate Mappings. For each incoming
span at a given service 𝑆, we define a candidate mapping as the set
of candidate child spans, one for each backend service invoked by
𝑆as per the call graph, that is jointly feasible as explained below. We
use timing constraints derived from the call graph and dependency
order at that service to identify the set of jointly feasible candidate
mappings for each incoming span. We refer back to Figure 1 to ex-
emplify such constraints. Given that service A depends on B, we
can constrain the set of child spans to B for the incoming parent
span 𝑅1-𝑅8 at A to the ones that satisfy the following criteria: (i) the
child span’s request 𝑅2 was sent to B after 𝑅1 arrived at A, and (ii)
the corresponding response 𝑅3 from B for that child span’s request
arrived at A before the parent span’s response 𝑅8 left A. Likewise,
we can constrain the set of feasible child spans to C. The dependency
order (i.e. A invokes B and C sequentially) allows us to add additional
constraints when considering 𝑅1’s candidate mappings for child
spans at B and C – (iii) response (𝑅5) of a candidate child span must
arrive from B at A before the request (𝑅6) of a candidate child span is
sent from A to C. A set of candidate spans (i.e., a candidate mapping)
satisfying all these constraints is deemed feasible.
Step 2: Creating Optimization Batches. To start, we split the 𝑀
spans into non-overlapping batches for joint optimization. As step 4
will describe, TraceWeaver employs a solver to do the joint optimiza-
tion. The intent of batching is to make using the solver feasible by
limiting the size of the graph (proportional to batch size) passed to it.
Our batching strategy employs the following algorithm to eliminate
shared candidates across batches. At a high level, we try to make a
cut (i.e., create batch boundaries) in such a way that no child spans
satisfy constraints for parent spans in multiple batches; but we also
limit the maximum size (𝐵) if an appropriate batch boundary is not
identified within that threshold.
(i) We sort all 𝑀incoming spans at the given service by start time,
with ties broken by end time.
(ii) We consider every adjacent pair of spans (𝑖, 𝑖+1) for a possible
cut, where a cut denotes a batch ending with span 𝑖and the next
batch starting with span 𝑖+1.
(iii) We make a cut if (a) the current batch size is larger than a thresh-
old (𝐵=100) or if (b) (1) there are zero common candidates between
span 𝑖+1 and the preceding span 𝑗with the latest end time (i.e., the
span which finished last among all preceding spans 0 through 𝑖) and
(2) the span 𝑗ends before span 𝑖+1.
This algorithm’s runtime is 𝑂(𝑀). In Appendix A.2, we prove that
the latter condition (b) ensures that span 𝑖+1 or any later span will
not have any candidates in common with the previous batch.
Step 3: Constructing delay distributions. We construct delay
distributionsforcaller/calleecombinationsperthecallgraphandthe
dependency order observed at 𝑆. For example, consider the scenario
where service A (𝑆= A in this case) initiates a call to service B and,
upon receiving a response from B, subsequently calls service C as
illustrated in Figure 1. In this context, we construct two distributions
to encapsulate this scenario and the exhibited sequential depen-
dence. These two distributions represent the time elapsed between
(i) the arrival of a request at A and the subsequent transmission of
the corresponding outgoing request to B and (ii) the reception of
a response from B and the subsequent transmission of the corre-
sponding outgoing request to C, respectively. Note, estimating such
distributions is non-trivial since we naturally do not have the actual
mappings between spans arriving at A and spans going from A to
B, which could have given us the actual values of the processing
delays. This is a chicken-and-egg problem: if the mappings were
available, the distributions could be constructed trivially, but the
distributions are needed to produce the inferred span mappings (the
TraceWeaver output). Note that the real-time gaps between the in-
coming and the associated outgoing spans are not possible to obtain
in a system without tracing (as this is the very problem TraceWeaver
is attempting to solve). We resolve this by using a seed distribution
followed by successive iterations, jointly discovering a distribution
833



--- PAGE 8 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
and mapping that agree well with each other (as illustrated in Fig-
ure 9 in Appendix A.3). Such iterative techniques are commonly
used in other domains for unsupervised optimization [32].
In the 1st iteration, we fit a Gaussian distribution for this delay 𝑡:
N (𝜇𝐴𝐵,𝜎𝐴𝐵). Note that 𝜇𝐴𝐵can be estimated exactly without know-
ing the precise mapping. Since the mean of the differences equals the
difference of the means, we can take the difference between the mean
ofarrivaltimesof𝑀externalrequestsatAandthemeanofdeparture
times of 𝑀requests from A to B. To estimate 𝜎𝐴𝐵, we split 𝑀spans
into𝑅=10 buckets and compute the empirical mean for each. We can
calculate the approximate sample standard deviation (¯𝜎𝐴𝐵) across
these bucket means (our samples). To obtain𝜎𝐴𝐵(standard deviation
of our population of 𝑀spans) we need to multiply that with
√
𝑅(as
𝜎𝐴𝐵= √𝑛* ¯𝜎𝐴𝐵per central limit theorem [59], where𝑛is no. of sam-
ples or bucket means). Note that this estimate is only approximate
since𝜎𝐴𝐵iscomputedoverbucketmeansratherthanindividualdata-
pointsfromthepopulation(whichwedonothave).Nevertheless,this
is sufficient to create initial “seed” distributions for the first iteration.
In subsequent iterations, the final output of the previous iteration
(i.e., mapped spans) is available which gives us (our best estimate of)
individual data-points. We use a much more robust Gaussian Mix-
ture Model (GMM) [50] to fit these data-points using an expectation
maximization (EM) algorithm [49]. A GMM is a powerful type of
mixture model GMM(𝐶), comprised of several Gaussians, each iden-
tified by 𝑐∈{1,..,𝐶}, and parameterized by 𝜇𝑐,𝐴𝐵, 𝜎𝑐,𝐴𝐵, and mixing
weight 𝜋𝑐,𝐴𝐵. GMMs are known to be a universal approximator of
densities [30, p. 65], given a finite number of Gaussian components
𝐶with enough parameters. To identify 𝐶, we run a sweep from 𝐶
= 1 to 20 components and use the GMM (𝐶) which minimizes the
value from Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) [58], a standard
model selection tool used to mitigate over-fitting. Over successive
iterations, the inferred mappings from previous iterations improve
the delay distributions resulting in better future mappings. However,
successive iterations that leverage a more complicated Gaussian
Mixture Model only boost accuracy for scenarios where a simple
Gaussian is insufficient to model the underlying delay distributions.
Step 4: Ranking candidate mappings. We use the delay distribu-
tion inferred in Step 3 to score each candidate mapping. Let𝑍denote
a candidate mapping. In Figure 1, for service A, let incoming span
𝑅1-𝑅8 be mapped to outgoing spans 𝑅2-𝑅5 and 𝑅6-𝑅7 according to
𝑍. We define the score of mapping 𝑍as
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑍) =𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐴𝐵(𝑡1, 𝑡2)+𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐵𝐶(𝑡5, 𝑡6)+𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐶𝐴(𝑡7, 𝑡8)
where 𝑡1 is the time at which 𝑅1 arrived at A, 𝑡2 is the time at which
𝑅2 was sent, 𝑡5 is the time at which 𝑅5 was received, 𝑡6 is the time at
which𝑅6 wassent,𝑡7 isthetimeatwhich𝑅7 wasreceived,and𝑡8 isthe
time at which 𝑅8 was sent. Note that all the candidate mappings ob-
tained from step 1 are feasible, hence 𝑡1 <=𝑡2 <=𝑡5 <=𝑡6 <=𝑡7 <=𝑡8
(or else 𝑍would be infeasible). We set,
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐴𝐵(𝑡1, 𝑡2) =logP(𝑡=𝑡2−𝑡1|Θ) =log
 𝐶
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝜋𝑖P(𝑡|𝜇𝑖,𝜎𝑖)
!
where P(𝑡= 𝑡2 −𝑡1|Θ) is the probability density function of the
GMM described by Θ. Note, iteration 1 is just a special case of
GMM with just 1 component such that 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐴𝐵(𝑡1, 𝑡2) = logP[𝑡=
𝑡2−𝑡1|N (𝜇𝐴𝐵, 𝜎𝐴𝐵)]. All possible candidate mappings are ranked
using this scoring criteria.
Step 5: Joint optimization. Given the batch of spans where each
incoming span has a set of candidate mappings, we cast the prob-
lem of finding the “best” mapping for each span as an optimization
problem. The optimization attempts to find a set of mappings for the
batch (one mapping per span) that maximizes the cumulative score
of that set subject to two constraints: (1) an incoming span should
only be assigned one mapping, (2) the same outgoing span must not
be present in two different mappings. This construction turns out to
be an instance of the multidimensional assignment problem which
is NP-hard [41]. We propose an online algorithm ( as illustrated in
Figure 10 in appendix) which approximates the global maxima by
finding the maximum independent set (MIS) and works as follows:
(i) We find the top 𝐾=5 candidate mappings for each span.
(ii) Next, we transform each span’s top 𝐾candidate mappings as
vertices in a graph with weights proportional to their score.
(iii) Then, we add edges between vertices if they break constraints.
Thatis,weaddanedgebetweencandidatemappingsofthesamespan
(to address constraint 1) and an edge between two candidate map-
pings that share a common outgoing span (to address constraint 2).
(iv) As each batch is fairly small, we can solve MIS exactly or nearly
optimally using Gurobi [3], an off-the-shelf MIS solver.
(v) Once the mappings have been chosen for a batch, the outgoing
spans of those mappings are deleted so that they cannot be assigned
again to other incoming spans in subsequent batches. This only
occurs if there are common candidates across batches, which we
minimize via our choice of batch boundaries in Step 2.
4.2
Incorporating Dynamism
In section §4.1, we assumed the call graphs to be static. We now de-
scribe how TraceWeaver handles the predominant class of call-graph
deviations, where requests can follow any valid subset of the usual
call graph. This class of dynamism includes cases where some back-
end calls are not made due to (1) caching, (2) service failures, or (3) se-
mantic reasons where the backend calls are unnecessary. To address
such cases, we create a fuzzy version of our optimization that allows
for a fraction of incoming spans to not have a complete mapping,
i.e., their mapping does not have an outgoing span for each outgoing
endpoint, thereby only traversing a subset of the call-graph. To iden-
tify and limit what fraction of such incoming spans are allowed this
opportunity (to control fuzziness), we look at the externally observ-
able discrepancy between what we expect given the call graph and
what we observe in reality (e.g., instead of 1000 outgoing spans, we
observeonly900).Wefillupsuchdiscrepanciesusingphantom“skip”
spans, such that the optimization can use them to fill in the gaps (e.g.,
span W →span X →skip span →span Z). In addition to limiting the
number of skip spans, it is crucial to allow an incoming span opportu-
nity to use it only according to its likelihood of having encountered
dynamism. To realize both, we run the following algorithm:
(1) First, we calculate the total discrepancy between incoming re-
quests and outgoing requests for each backend service over a large
window (e.g., 10 secs) so that the observed discrepancy is not inci-
dental due to the window being too small to see outgoing spans. This
value is set as the total budget and skip spans are created accordingly.
(2) Next, each optimization batch is analyzed to estimate the max.
degree of dynamism it could have encountered. This value directly
corresponds to how many skip spans it may need at most. This value
834



--- PAGE 9 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
has max quota 𝑄=𝑋−𝑌, where 𝑋is the total number of outgoing
spans needed for this batch, and 𝑌is the number of spans that can
only be assigned to this batch given the constraints.
(3) Given the total budget and max. quota for each batch, we dis-
tribute skip spans to each batch using a water-filling algorithm [60].
This step iteratively distributes the spans to the most needy batches
(i.e., with the highest Q values), stopping only when it runs out of
total budget. This step also ensures that whatever error in estimation
we make in calculating the total budget is distributed across batches.
(4) Finally, we run the same joint optimization described earlier
with each batch having access to a certain number of skip spans
as allocated previously. Also, we must adjust how we estimate the
initial seed delay distributions if there are skip spans as the exact
mean cannot be calculated as in §4.1 step 3. Hence, to initialize our
optimization, we use delay distributions built on mappings obtained
by running WAP5 [48]’s approach (described in §6)). Note this is
only for the 1st iteration and for successive iterations, GMMs are
leveraged to produce fully mapped traces in the usual manner.
5
SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Our prototype for TraceWeaver is implemented as a process which
continuously ingests span info. and outputs the mapped spans (i.e.,
full traces). The key inputs required by TraceWeaver include span-
level info. and the call graph with the dependency order. We discuss
how we obtain these inputs in our system as well as alternate options.
5.1
Obtaining live span information
5.1.1 Capturing raw data.
(1) eBPFhooks(ourapproach).Forarunningservice,wecanemploy
eBPF hooks to obtain info. for requests/ responses of each parent
and child span arriving at/ departing from that service. For instance,
we implement the following eBPF-based approach for HotelReserva-
tion [28], a gRPC-based app used in our evaluation. Using eBPF, we
hook onto networking syscalls (e.g., accept, send, recv, close) for rele-
vant processes (filtering on PID), which enables us to capture info. on
the wire without directly interfacing with or instrumenting the app.
(2) Alternatives: (a) In deployments running service meshes, span
data is already available with sidecar proxies, which route requests/
responses via itself using iptable rules. These proxies intercept
the HTTP connections and have visibility into the request and re-
sponse headers, allowing them to gather span information (e.g.,
request/response mappings, timings). (b) Tools like Wireshark [61]
and tcpdump [55] are also sufficient to capture raw network traffic.
5.1.2. Parsing and mapping requests/ responses. Sidecar proxies
and tools like Wireshark already contain suitable protocol analyzers
or adapters, which allow for parsing serialized raw byte stream data.
For example, raw data can be decoded to construct gRPC requests
and map them to their corresponding responses by understanding
thestructureddataencapsulatedwithintherawstream.FortheeBPF-
basedapproach,wecanrunasimilaradapterasaseparateuser-space
process, which ingests raw data from the kernel eBPF component to
parse and produce the same output. For gRPC, one of the app layer
protocols we tested on, we now describe an interesting challenge.
Capturing requests/ responses from gRPC, which is built on top of
HTTP/2 [6] (the next generation of HTTP protocol), can be tricky.
This is due to the stateful header compression scheme (HPACK [5]),
which makes request/ response headers hard to parse. The HPACK-
basedcompressionfeatureinvolvestheclientandservermaintaining
a dictionary, mapping previously seen headers to unique numeric
codes, and only passing these codes in further communication. With-
out access to this dictionary, we need to resort to sniffing from the
beginning of a long-running HTTP connection in order to not miss
important connection information available only at the initial phase.
Also, the gRPC adapter must use a “man-in-the-middle” style ap-
proach to keep track of the dictionaries being actively updated at
the client/ server. Our adapter uses standard HTTP libraries [7] to
continuously ingest and parse this data, which allows us to read the
plaintext HTTP header and payload. We currently do not handle
encrypted traffic, but existing software solutions like Pixie [9], built
on eBPF, have built-in mechanisms to trace the API between the ap-
plication and the SSL/TLS library to capture it before it is encrypted.
5.2
Obtaining call graph and dependency order
5.2.1 Generating test spans.
(1) Test environments (our approach): To learn the call graph asso-
ciated with a service, we can replay production traces (identified
by query parameters or API endpoints) in a test environment. We
do this one trace at a time so that the ensuing spans can be easily
weaved together to form “test traces” due to the lack of competing
candidates. We additionally apply a large artificial delay using Linux
TC rules on each observed outgoing span to create varied examples.
This last step ensures there is enough variety in these test traces to
prevent ambiguity in learning dependencies. For example, in Fig-
ure 1, it can be tricky to determine whether A calls B and C serially
or just appears so due to the quick completion of B’s invocation. If
delaying B’s invocation also delays C’s invocation, it would indicate
serial ordering. Note that production traces could be clustered and a
subsetof representativerequests from eachclustercouldbeexecuted
in isolation to reduce execution time. We leave this to future work.
(2) Alternatives: (a) If test environments are not feasible, test traces
can also be generated from production environments by spinning up
a tiny replica for the service of interest and re-directing one request
atatimetoit.Thiswouldalsoprovideuswithtestspanswhichcanbe
mappedtogethertrivially.(b)Alargevolumeofproductiontracescan
also be analyzed to find test traces, given that there might be periods
of low load where the mappings are obvious and constructing traces
is trivial. We leave the exploration of these options to future work.
5.2.2 Inferring call graphs and dependency order. We use test
tracestolearnthecallgraphanddependencyorderusingtheanalysis
below.Foreachsetoftesttraceswhichcoverthesamepath,wemodel
alltheservicesittraversesasverticesinagraph.Theaimistoobtaina
graphwithdirectededgeswhichwouldindicatedependencies.Atser-
vice A in Figure 1, A and B are endpoints for incoming and outgoing
spans. Here, A→B would indicate that an incoming span’s request
at A must precede an outgoing span’s request to B. Similarly, since B
and C are both outgoing endpoints, B→C would indicate that B’s in-
vocation must conclude (i.e., its response must come back) before C’s
invocation. For this graph, we initially add directed edges between
every vertex pair (as every dependency is possible). By analyzing the
traces from the test dataset, we remove the corresponding edge from
the graph for every violating example of a dependency. Example,
if a trace indicates that B finishes execution before or during C, we
835



--- PAGE 10 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
remove C→B. By iterating through all test traces, we obtain a graph
with edges representing genuine dependencies, which we can use as
constraints. Similar approaches are espoused by [21, 40] to construct
causal models for request execution which can also be leveraged.
5.3
Deployment modes
TraceWeaver allows for the following deployment modes.
(1) Offline: In this mode, span info. is collected from apps at runtime,
andstoredforlateranalysis.Whenanoperatorrequirestrace-levelin-
sights for a specific time period, TraceWeaver can selectively run the
algorithm on spans from that period to produce the required traces.
(2) Online (enables tail-based sampling): In this mode, span info. is
collected at runtime and sent to a live, running TraceWeaver instance
which reconstructs traces in real-time. This online deployment mode
of TraceWeaver also enables trace sampling. Sampling is an impor-
tant use case for distributed tracing, where to reduce overhead, only
a certain percentage of API calls are traced, but each is traced across
its whole call tree using trace IDs. In this deployment mode, all
requests and responses are collected temporarily by TraceWeaver
for mapping. Next, TraceWeaver maps all the requests using the
optimization algorithm and produces the fully mapped traces. Now,
sampling can be done by the appropriate logging agent (either Trace-
Weaver itself or by interfacing with the app) at any given operator
sampling rate and the rest of the traces can be deleted. This approach
requires temporary storage of all spans for each sliding window of
time (e.g., 1-5 seconds) where the window needs to chosen based off
the known response latency distribution of the app (e.g., such that all
plausible candidate mappings are captured within it). We evaluate
the runtime performance of this online deployment setting in §6.
6
EVALUATION
6.1
Setup
We evaluate on benchmark apps from the DeathStarBench[28] suite
– HotelReservation and Media Microservices (Fig. 7 & 8 in Appen-
dix A.1), a Node.js based microservice demo[11], and on production
traces from the Alibaba cluster dataset[12]. HotelReservation, Media
Microservice, and Node.js apps comprise 6, 14, 7 different services
respectively excluding a variable count of caching and database com-
ponents (Memcached, Redis, and MongoDB). The microservices are
orchestrated using Docker [24] and Kubernetes [38] and are run on 3
VMs running Ubuntu 16.04 (each provisioned with 4 cores and 4 GB
of RAM). All VMs run within a bare-metal 32-core Intel Xeon Silver
server. We use the wrk2 [57] load generator to create requests that
hit each app’s frontend (to generate test as well as live spans). We
employ Jaeger [35] to collect ground truth of the end-to-end traces.
Baselines. We compare TraceWeaver against the following:
(i) WAP5 [48]: It tackles a weaker problem of dependency mapping
by using the span-level information to compute the probability with
which services invoke each other. For each child request 𝑟, WAP5
assigns it to the most recent parent request that is not yet assigned
(or leaves it unassigned if there’s no parent within a specific time
window).Dependingontheservicethechildrequestwastransmitted
to and the service the parent request was received from, appropriate
frequency counters are updated, and the probability distributions
are generated. Then, all such probability trees at each service are
aggregated to obtain the overall pattern, determining the probability
that a service 𝐴calls another service 𝐵to process its requests. We
re-purpose the tree-building algorithm of WAP5 for request tracing,
pickingthemostlikelychildspanrequestsasthemappingforthepar-
ent span’s request 𝑟. While this version of WAP5 also employs map-
ping spans using probability scores, TraceWeaver differs from it con-
siderably owing to techniques mentioned in §4: constraint-checking,
near-perfect batching, GMM-based ranking, and joint optimization.
(ii) vPath [54]/ DeepFlow [51]: As previously mentioned, vPath as-
sumes a specific threading model where threads pick up requests
and process them to completion before switching to the next request.
It assumes no request handoffs between threads, no async calls, and
assumes access to the thread ID for the thread processing a request.
Whilethiscaneffectivelystitchspansatserviceswheretheseassump-
tions hold, it fails at services where it does not. DeepFlow employs
identical assumptions so they’re represented by our implementation
of vPath in the results. For the tested apps which do request handoffs
between threads internally, we do not have access to the ID of the
final processing thread (we only have the gRPC thread ID that picked
up the request) so DeepFlow/vPath is in-applicable. Similarly, no
thread IDs are available in the Alibaba production dataset (possibly
due to the nature of the apps as well as due to the overhead of captur-
ingthreadIDs).Soinsuchcases,lackingthreadIDs,vPath/DeepFlow
is made to assume that all requests are handled by the same thread.
(iii) FCFS: We also construct a strawman where external requests ar-
riving at a service A are assigned to the outgoing requests at service
B based on their arrival and departure orders which works well if
requests are processed in order with limited or no parallelism.
6.2
Benchmark applications
6.2.1
Accuracy vs. load. We begin by testing TraceWeaver’s accu-
racy as we increase the load (in terms of requests per second), calcu-
lated based on each app’s bottleneck. Increasing the load increases
the level of concurrency among requests that are simultaneously
processed by the app. Figure 4a shows the accuracy of end-to-end
tracing for varying load for TraceWeaver, and the baselines, WAP5,
vPath (DeepFlow) and FCFS across the benchmark apps. As load
increases,highlevelsofparallelismkickin,reorderingrequestsmore
frequently, so FCFS cannot keep up. Multiple apps we test on break
vPath’s assumptions as they employ RPC frameworks like Thrift [1]
and gRPC [2]. The thread-based approach manages to get 80% accu-
racy at low loads, but accuracy quickly degrades with increasing load
as the internal multiplexing of requests across threads is not visible
to it. WAP5, whose statistical algorithm was designed for a different
usecaseanddoesnotconsideroverlappingparallelrequestscarefully,
experiences similar degradation in accuracy. Due to a combination
of techniques such as constraint-checking, batching, ranking, and
joint optimization, TraceWeaver is able to achieve high accuracy.
Top 𝐾accuracy: We also analyze the accuracy of one of top 𝐾map-
pings being correct and we find that accuracy to be highly boosted.
A Top 𝐾(for low 𝐾, we use 𝐾= 5) output can still be very useful to
an operator as they need only enumerate within a ranked list of 5
candidate mappings at each service for a problematic span which
would enable fine-grained debugging with enhanced accuracy.
6.2.2
Accuracy vs response times. Developers are often interested
in analyzing end-to-end traces which suffer tail latency. Figure 4b
836



--- PAGE 11 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
20
40
60
80
100
System load %
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy % (avg. across apps)
TraceWeaver (Top K)
TraceWeaver
WAP5
vPath
FCFS
(a) Accuracy vs. load
(across multiple apps).
20
40
60
80
100
Latency Percentile Bins
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy % (avg. across apps)
TraceWeaver (Top K)
TraceWeaver
WAP5
vPath
FCFS
(b) Accuracy vs latency %ile
(across multiple apps).
0
20
40
60
Cache %
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy %
TraceWeaver
WAP5
vPath
FCFS
(c) Accuracy in the presence
of dynamic behavior (caching).
1
2
3
4
5
6
Intensity Level of Request Interleaving
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy %
TraceWeaver
vPath
(d) Accuracy in the presence of
async storage I/O.
Figure4:(a)Accuracyacrossincreasingsystemloadonallbenchmarks.(b)Accuracyacrossrequestsbinnedbyresponsetimesonall
benchmarks. (c) Accuracy across increasing caching rates at one endpoint within the Hotel Reservation application. (d) Accuracy
across increasing interleaving (1 is low and 6 is high) of async I/O reads within a single thread which cause inaccuracy in DeepFlow.
illustrates the accuracy for requests binned by their response time
percentiles at single load level = 125 RPS (response times ranged
from 40 ms to 225 ms for our applications). We can see that for
the tail 10%ile requests, the accuracy of other baselines suffers, but
TraceWeaver recovers the end-to-end traces with good accuracy.
6.2.3
Accuracy under increasing dynamism (caching). Behaviors
such as caching and errors result in call graphs which differs from
the static call graph we expect by traversing only a subset of the
graph.Wehandlethisdeviationasmentionedin§4.2.Toevaluate,we
artificially insert caching into the search service of HotelReservation
app, varying the cache hit probability from 5% to 80%. As we allow
the optimization to apply call graph constraints in a fuzzy manner,
TraceWeaver is able to get good accuracy in this dynamic scenario
as illustrated in Figure 4c. Other approaches like FCFS and WAP5
fail to gracefully decline in accuracy due to caching causing high
misalignment between the order of incoming and outgoing spans.
6.2.4
Accuracy in asynchronous settings. As mentioned previously,
requests being handed off between threads within an app internally
can break vPath/Deepflow’s threading assumption (apps running
gRPC/ Thrift already test this in Figure 4a). Yet another case is when
async I/O causes multiple requests to be handled simultaneously by
the same thread. Such async I/O can cause the last incoming request
to not be responsible for the next outgoing request (as shown in Fig-
ure 2(b)). Figure 4d shows an experiment where we introduce such
interleaving by creating async I/O requests for disk reads. We control
interleaving by setting the standard deviation of the file size distri-
bution. vPath/DeepFlow which depend on a synchronous model fail
in such settings while TraceWeaver continues to perform well.
6.2.5
TraceWeaver ablation study. To understand the contribution
of each component of TraceWeaver to the overall accuracy, we con-
duct an ablation study (by removing components of TraceWeaver
incrementally) on the traces from the HotelReservation and Media
Microservice apps. Figure 5 illustrates this experiment, showing a
degradation in accuracy as expected when we incrementally remove
the following optimizations: a. using invocation order to apply con-
straints(line3),b.iteratingtoimprovedelaydistributions(line4),and
c. batching to apply joint optimization across spans (line 5). Please
note that not all optimizations benefit all apps equally. For instance,
serviceswithdelaydistributionsthatasimpleGaussiancanrepresent
20
40
60
80
100
System load %
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy % (avg. across apps)
1: TraceWeaver w/ TopK
2: TraceWeaver
3: (2) w/o invocation order
4: (3) w/o GMM iterations
5: (4) w/o joint optimization
Figure 5: Component-level accuracy gains in TraceWeaver.
well will gain little from multiple iterations improving the GMM-
based model, while others may see a substantial boost in accuracy
(78% to 85% in one case). Similarly, a service where all backend invo-
cations are done in parallel will not benefit from using constraints
from the invocation order, as there aren’t any serial dependencies.
6.3
Production traces
6.3.1
Accuracy vs. load multiple. Next, we evaluate on the Alibaba
cluster dataset [12] similarly to the benchmark apps (accuracy vs.
load). Our analysis considers a dataset spanning the traces corre-
sponding to 15 most popular call graphs. The ground truth traces
containparent-childrelationshipsbetweenspansandstarttimesand
durations of individual spans. However, given the sanitized nature
of a production dataset, call graph identifiers (i.e., API endpoint, port,
header parameters) are notably missing. Therefore, for our analysis,
we slice the trace data into buckets, one per call graph and evaluate
TraceWeaver on each bucket. Another issue is that the production
data is sampled at a rate of 0.5%, making the tracing challenge ex-
tremely easy (due to large spacings between adjacent spans in the
sampled set). This is a common problem with any production dataset
since operators must employ sampling to restrict the volume of logs.
Therefore, to enable testing on production data, we employ the fol-
lowing strategy to compress the dataset to effectively increase the
load while still evaluating on real (unchanged) service time distribu-
tions. To do this, we compress the time intervals between incoming
spans in this trace dataset while, crucially, preserving the essential
incoming →outgoing delay characteristics of the service. To clarify,
suppose two incoming spans,𝑆1 and𝑆2 (belonging to trace𝑇1 and𝑇2)
837



--- PAGE 12 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
1
200
1000
4000
10000
15000
Load Multiple (Compression Factor)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy Dist. (Across Call Graphs)
TraceWeaver (Top K)
TraceWeaver
WAP5
vPath
FCFS
(a) Accuracy on Alibaba’s dataset
(across 15 popular call graphs).
	






	






Pearson Correlation 
Coefficient: 0.89
(b) Confidence scores for services
in the Alibaba’s dataset.
Search
Geo
Rate
Reserve
Profile
Service
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Response time (ms)
Operator view 
 w/o tracing
TraceWeaver
Ground Truth
(c) Latency profile analysis of
each service.
0
10
20
30
% of traffic to version B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p-value
W/O Tracing
W/ TraceWeaver (@ 90% accuracy)
0.05 Significance Level
(d) A/B tests using request-traces
via TraceWeaver.
Figure 6: (a) Accuracy across increasing load multiple on Alibaba’s dataset (boxplots presents accuracy %iles for 15 call graphs).
(b) Confidence score compared to accuracy at specific services. (c) Latency profile at each service for requests above the 98%ile
latency bracket. Boxplots represent the [5, 25, 50, 75, 95]%iles of corresponding distributions. (d) p-value for t-test comparing
user satisfaction when 𝑥% of requests were sent to B vs when all requests were sent to A.
with arrival times𝑡1 and𝑡2, durations𝑑1 and𝑑2 are mapped to outgo-
ing spans 𝑅1 and 𝑅2 respectively. To compress, we adjust the spacing
(𝑡2 - 𝑡1) to be much smaller using a compression factor𝑐𝑓while leav-
ing𝑑1 and𝑑2 unchanged such that time gap for 𝑆1→𝑅1 and 𝑆2→𝑅2
remains the same. We also adjust the spacing between the outgoing
spans by the same compression factor𝑐𝑓to ensure correctness. Effec-
tively, a higher compression factor leads to higher concurrency and
overlap in the traces creating many more plausible candidates which
make non-intrusive request tracing harder which we can use to eval-
uate TraceWeaver. We refer to this compression factor as “load multi-
ple” to signify the load increase. Please note, the trace data only indi-
cates the service names for the caller and the callees but not the exact
container ID. Therefore, we also normalize the load multiple by the
number of replicas of a given service (i.e., for service𝑆, effective_load
= load_multiple / num_replicas) to recreate the load incident on a
single container of that service (assuming load is balanced equally).
The aim is to recreate realistic load but we increase the load multiple
value further (i.e., to 15000) to evaluate the TraceWeaver’s breaking
point. Figure 6a shows our results on this dataset. As the load multi-
ple increases, the accuracy drops for all algorithms, but TraceWeaver
is still able to get high accuracy that is still practically usable.
6.3.2
Confidence scores (per-service). For each service 𝑆, we com-
pute a confidence score, equal to 100% minus the % of incoming spans
at 𝑆that either remained unmapped or weren’t assigned their top
choice mapping of outgoing spans. We find this confidence score
to be well correlated with the accuracy with a very high Pearson
correlation coefficient [46] of 0.89 (Figure 6b). Such a score can be
used by operators to select an informed set of services to instrument
if partial instrumentation of the application is possible (since instru-
menting a small set of the 𝑋most difficult services among a total of
𝑌services is much easier than instrumenting all of them).
6.4
Using approximate tracing for debugging
We showcase two use cases of how operators can use (imperfect)
end-to-end traces derived from TraceWeaver for operational tasks.
6.4.1
Troubleshooting delays for slow requests. We emulate a per-
formance anomaly scenario in the HotelReservation app (Fig. 7 in
the appendix) by inflating the request-response span latency at the
Reserve and Profile services by 40ms for 10% of randomly selected
requests. The operator’s use-case is to localize which service(s) are
causing tail latency for the slowest 2% of requests (the chosen subset)?
Answering this query requires complete traces for requests hit-
ting the frontend, which have an e2e response latency > 98%ile and
then computing the time spent at each service individually. Figure 6c
presents our results. Note, for this app, spans can incur high delays at
any set of services. So, in the absence of request traces, if an operator
filters spans at each service by tail latency (top 2%), all services show
up as contributing high latency (leading their debugging astray).
This is because there are different subsets of requests which suffer
high latency at each service. However, this view does not filter only
requests that suffer the most cumulatively (and are hence in the top
2% overall). With full traces produced by TraceWeaver, an operator
can now filter on traces (instead of spans) in the top 2% bracket. Note,
these traces are in the top 2% because they suffer anomalous delays
(which we injected) at two services simultaneously increasing their
cumulative delay. Our results show us closely matching the ground
truth in revealing Reserve and Profile as the culprits. Note that this
aggregate query output, which is of interest to the operator, is not
affected by a few inaccurate traces showcasing TraceWeaver’s value.
6.4.2
A/B testing of a recommendation engine. In this scenario, oper-
ators want to run A/B tests for a new version (=B) of a recommenda-
tion algorithm and want to measure the effect of the new algorithm
on user engagement. Usually, the service is modified so that a small
percentage(=x)ofrequestsareredirectedtothenewerversion(=B)in-
stead of the older version (=A). Thereafter, the two versions are com-
pared using two-sample t-tests [31] to analyze if the difference be-
tween the user-satisfaction scores of the two groups (users served by
A vs. B) is statistically significant or not. The test produces a p-value
which is the probability of obtaining results at least as extreme as the
observed results. If 𝑝<0.05 (most commonly chosen threshold [45]),
operators can conclude that the difference seen is statistically sig-
nificant and that version B results in better user satisfaction than A.
Without request traces, the operator cannot determine which user
request was redirected to A or B. Note, it is not enough to analyze
spans at A and B because user-satisfaction is not calculable at span-
level and is only reflected end-to-end. Hence, the only way to com-
pare user-satisfaction is to consider the aggregate user-satisfaction
838



--- PAGE 13 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
score across all requests. If there is an increase in the overall user-
satisfaction, one can conclude that the increase is due to the𝑥% of the
requests which were redirected to B. However, since B is untested, it
is common to have a small 𝑥, say 1%, to minimize risk. If only a small
number of requests are redirected to B, then the aggregate user sat-
isfaction does not change much and conclusive evidence of improve-
ment due to B cannot be obtained. The blue line in Figure 6d shows
p-value remaining high for small 𝑥, indicating that there was incon-
clusiveevidenceforBbeingbetter.As𝑥increases,theaggregateuser-
satisfaction score will pronouncedly reflect the changes due to B.
With request traces, operators can separate the requests going to A
and B, albeit with some error. The green line in Figure 6d shows that
even when requests to A and B are separated with only 90% accuracy,
theA/BtesttaskofdeterminingifBimprovesusersatisfaction(as𝑝<
0.05) can be completed. More importantly, it can be done with far less
traffic redirected to B compared to the case w/o tracing (2% vs 20%).
6.5
Performance overhead
Presently, a single instance of TraceWeaver takes a few seconds (<5)
to map 1000 spans on average (across our benchmarks) which is
roughly ∼200 RPS per container. However, we can further improve
runtime by instantiating new instances of TraceWeaver which can
handledisjointsetsofspansinparallel(e.g.,instance𝐴handlest=0to
1s, 𝐵handles t=1 to 2s). The batching scheme mentioned in §4 helps
identify such disjoint sets. However, systems handling production-
scaleloadsoftenhandleitbysplittingtrafficacrossreplicacontainers,
limiting per-container load. Hence, even in systems handling high
load, a single online TraceWeaver instance usually only handles
O(1000) RPS at most. Note, regardless of deployment mode (online
v. offline), TraceWeaver runs off the critical path of the application.
6.6
Limitations
A single TraceWeaver instance is only required to reconstruct traces
for spans within a single container because requests (of parent spans)
arriving at container A do not result in backend requests (of child
spans) being sent out of a different container B. This ultimately
limits the concurrency that TraceWeaver needs to deal with to the
resources of a single physical node, or more commonly, a single
container within a node hosting multiple containers. However, it is
possible that some apps may have extremely high parallelism within
a single process, thus increasing the candidates TraceWeaver has
to disambiguate among, worsening accuracy. However, most mi-
croservice systems prefer to avoid employing vertical scale-up [10]
to handle high load [19] (further limiting parallelism) due to a variety
ofreasonslikeresourcelimitations,disruptivecontainerrestarts[29],
etc., and instead prefer to horizontally scale-out [4].
TraceWeaver currently cannot handle cases where, for a given
incomingspan,thecallgraphishighlyunpredictable(i.e.,itishardto
know which call graph class a span belongs to). These include cases
where the ensuing call graph after the reception of the span’s request
cannot be determined by standardized endpoints or requires custom
application processing on the contents of the request to decide which
backend endpoints are invoked via child spans. Note that many
applications operate with predominantly static call graphs with
dynamism exhibited mainly in the forms handled in §4.2. For other
forms of dynamism, a clustering algorithm could better map spans
to call graphs, using the endpoint as only one of many inputs (others
could be span duration, candidate availability, header info., etc.).
TraceWeaver does not support head-based sampling [42], which
makesthesamplingdecisionwhentherequestassociatedwithaspan
arrives. To sample correctly, if a parent span is sampled, we want to
keep all child spans associated with that parent span. However, to de-
termine that association, TraceWeaver needs to (a) identify and com-
pare the span’s candidates (needing the response timestamp of the
span) and (b) jointly optimize across all parent spans in the same op-
timization batch (requiring multiple parent spans sharing candidates
with the span we’re sampling to have finished processing). These
properties are hard to satisfy in the case of head-based sampling, but
TraceWeaver can support tail-based sampling as outlined in §5.3.
7
FUTURE WORK
Identifying thread affinity. Deepflow/ vPath makes restrictive
assumptions about threading models, assuming no request hand-offs
between threads which are common in modern apps (e.g., apps using
gRPC/ Thrift). Tracking requests across such hand-offs (via moni-
toring syscalls handling critical section locks) could prove useful for
non-intrusive request tracing. Even when a thread handles many re-
quests concurrently (asynchronously), the ability to track requests to
threads can help prune plausible candidates that TraceWeaver needs
to consider, boosting accuracy. However, such fine-grained “taint-
tracking” is expensive, and we leave its exploration to future work.
Handling variations in the call graph. Handling variations be-
yondtheonesmentionedin§4.2canbenefitappsemployingquorums
or where requests can invoke new, previously unseen endpoints.
TraceWeaver can currently tackle the variations arising from spans
traversing a subset of the call graph. Handling other forms of vari-
ations remains an interesting challenge and potential directions
include looking at error codes in response headers to infer the num-
ber of retries and using eBPF to detect new syscalls.
8
CONCLUSION
Operating and debugging modern “cloud-native” applications with a
microservice architecture is challenging due to their distributed na-
ture. Our work introduces TraceWeaver, a system for non-intrusive
request tracing that reconstructs request traces without requiring
application-level code modifications. By leveraging span timings,
call graph knowledge, and statistical timing heuristics, TraceWeaver
significantlyoutperformsbaselineapproachesinaccuracy.Thishigh
accuracy suggests that TraceWeaver can greatly reduce the manual
effort typically required for tracing instrumentation, providing de-
velopers with an efficient and "free" debugging tool for managing
and debugging complex microservice-based applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Omid Azizi, Aurojit Panda, Sambhav Satija, Sangeetha
Abdu Jyothi, Devikrishna Radhakrishnan, and the Systems and Net-
working students and faculty at UIUC for their helpful discussions.
We also thank our shepherd, Xiaowei Yang, and the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable feedback. This work was supported by
IBM and by the NSF under award number 2312714.
839



--- PAGE 14 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
REFERENCES
[1] Apache thrift. https://thrift.apache.org/.
[2] gRPC. https://grpc.io/.
[3] Gurobi Optimizer. https://github.com/Gurobi.
[4] Horizontal
Pod
Autoscaling.
https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-
engine/docs/concepts/horizontalpodautoscaler.
[5] Hpack specification.
http://http2.github.io/compression-spec/compression-
spec.html.
[6] Http2. https://http2.github.io/.
[7] HTTP/2 parser. https://docs.python.org/3/library/http.client.html.
[8] Node.JS. https://nodejs.org/.
[9] Pixie. https://docs.px.dev/.
[10] Vertical
Pod
Autoscaling.
https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-
engine/docs/concepts/verticalpodautoscaler.
[11] Algun. Node.js microservice. https://github.com/algun/jaeger-nodejs-example,
2019.
[12] Alibaba. Alibaba cluster trace program. https://github.com/alibaba/clusterdata,
2021.
[13] S. Ashok, P. B. Godfrey, and R. Mittal. Leveraging service meshes as a new
network layer. In Twentieth ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets),
November 2021.
[14] O. Azizi.
OpenTelemetry or eBPF? That is the Question.
https:
//cloudnativeebpfdayna22.sched.com/event/1Auyh/opentelemetry-or-ebpf-
that-is-the-question-omid-azizi-new-relic-pixie, 2022.
[15] P. Bahl, R. Chandra, A. Greenberg, S. Kandula, D. A. Maltz, and M. Zhang.
Towards highly reliable enterprise network services via inference of multi-level
dependencies. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on Applications, Technologies,
Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communications, SIGCOMM ’07, page
13–24, New York, NY, USA, 2007. Association for Computing Machinery.
[16] P. Bailis, P. Alvaro, and S. Gulwani. Research for practice: Tracing and debugging
distributed systems; programming by examples. Commun. ACM, 60(7):46–49,
jun 2017.
[17] J. Berg, F. Ruffy, K. Nguyen, N. Yang, T. Kim, A. Sivaraman, R. Netravali, and
S. Narayana. Snicket: Query-driven distributed tracing. In Proceedings of the
Twentieth ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, HotNets ’21, page 206–212,
New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[18] I. Beschastnikh, P. Wang, Y. Brun, and M. D. Ernst. Debugging distributed systems:
Challenges and options for validation and debugging. Communications of the
ACM, 59(8):32–37, Aug. 2016.
[19] G.Blinowski,A.Ojdowska,andA.Przybyłek. Monolithicvs.microservicearchitec-
ture: A performance and scalability evaluation. IEEE Access, 10:20357–20374, 2022.
[20] X. Chen, M. Zhang, Z. M. Mao, and V. Bahl. Automating network application
dependency discovery: Experiences, limitations, and new solutions. In OSDI.
USENIX, January 2008.
[21] M. Chow, D. Meisner, J. Flinn, D. Peek, and T. F. Wenisch. The mystery machine:
End-to-end performance analysis of large-scale internet services. In 11th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 14), pages
217–231, Broomfield, CO, Oct. 2014. USENIX Association.
[22] M. Chow, K. Veeraraghavan, M. Cafarella, and J. Flinn. DQBarge: Improving
Data-Quality tradeoffs in Large-Scale internet services.
In 12th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16), pages
771–786, Savannah, GA, Nov. 2016. USENIX Association.
[23] Datadog. Datadog. https://www.datadoghq.com/.
[24] Docker. Docker. https://www.docker.com/, 2013.
[25] DynaTrace. DynaTrace. https://www.dynatrace.com/.
[26] eBPF. ebpf hooks, 2014.
[27] R. Fonseca, G. Porter, R. H. Katz, and S. Shenker. X-Trace: A pervasive network
tracing framework. In 4th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design &
Implementation (NSDI 07), Cambridge, MA, Apr. 2007. USENIX Association.
[28] Y. Gan, Y. Zhang, D. Cheng, A. Shetty, P. Rathi, N. Katarki, A. Bruno, J. Hu,
B. Ritchken, B. Jackson, K. Hu, M. Pancholi, Y. He, B. Clancy, C. Colen, F. Wen,
C. Leung, S. Wang, L. Zaruvinsky, M. Espinosa, R. Lin, Z. Liu, J. Padilla, and
C. Delimitrou. An open-source benchmark suite for microservices and their
hardware-software implications for cloud & edge systems. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’19, page 3–18, New York, NY, USA,
2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[29] Github.
Open Issue: Support in-place Pod vertical scaling in VPA.
https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/4016.
[30] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[31] W. S. Gosset. Independent two-sample t-test. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Student%27s_t-test#Independent_two-sample_t-test, 2023.
[32] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, and J. Franklin. The elements of statistical
learning: data mining, inference and prediction. The Mathematical Intelligencer,
27(2):460–468, 2005.
[33] Instana. Instana. https://www.ibm.com/cloud/instana.
[34] Istio. Istio. https://istio.io, 2021.
[35] Jaeger. Jaeger. https://www.jaegertracing.io/.
[36] J. Kaldor, J. Mace, M. Bejda, E. Gao, W. Kuropatwa, J. O’Neill, K. W. Ong, B. Schaller,
P. Shan, B. Viscomi, V. Venkataraman, K. Veeraraghavan, and Y. J. Song. Canopy:
An end-to-end performance tracing and analysis system. In Proceedings of the
26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP ’17, page 34–50, New York,
NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[37] E. Koskinen and J. Jannotti. Borderpatrol: isolating events for black-box tracing.
In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys European Conference on Computer
Systems 2008, Eurosys ’08, page 191–203, New York, NY, USA, 2008. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[38] Kubernetes. Kubernetes. https://kubernetes.io/, 2014.
[39] LightStep. LightStep. http://lightstep.com/, 2023.
[40] G. Mann, M. Sandler, D. Krushevskaja, S. Guha, and E. Even-Dar. Modeling the
parallel execution of Black-Box services. In 3rd USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics
in Cloud Computing (HotCloud 11), Portland, OR, June 2011. USENIX Association.
[41] D. M. Nguyen, H. A. Le Thi, and T. Pham Dinh. Solving the multidimensional
assignment problem by a cross-entropy method.
Journal of Combinatorial
Optimization, 27(4):808–823, 2014.
[42] OpenTelemetry.
Head Sampling.
https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/
sampling/#head-sampling.
[43] OpenTelemetry. OpenTelemetry. https://opentelemetry.io/.
[44] Oracle. Oracle. https://docs.oracle.com/en-us/iaas/Content/Functions/Tasks/
functionstracing.htm, 2023.
[45] K. Pearson. P-value. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-value#Usage, 2023.
[46] K. Pearson.
Pearson correlation coefficient.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pearson_correlation_coefficient, 2023.
[47] M. Raney. What I Wish I Had Known Before Scaling Uber to 1000 Services. In
GOTO Chicago, 2016.
[48] P. Reynolds, J. L. Wiener, J. C. Mogul, M. K. Aguilera, and A. Vahdat. WAP5:
Black-Box Performance Debugging for Wide-Area Systems. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’06, page 347–356,
New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery.
[49] scikit learn. Expectation Maximization. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
mixture.html#expectation-maximization.
[50] scikit learn. Gaussian Mixture Models. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
mixture.html.
[51] J. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Xiang, X. Shi, X. Li, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Yin, J. Wang,
M. Xu, Y. Li, J. Yin, J. Song, Z. Li, and R. Nie. Network-centric distributed tracing
with deepflow: Troubleshooting your microservices in zero code. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference, ACM SIGCOMM ’23, page 420–437, New
York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[52] B. H. Sigelman, L. A. Barroso, M. Burrows, P. Stephenson, M. Plakal, D. Beaver,
S. Jaspan, and C. Shanbhag. Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems tracing
infrastructure. Technical report, Google, Inc., 2010.
[53] F. D. Silva and C. Rich. Broaden application performance monitoring to support
digital business transformation, 2018.
[54] B. C. Tak, C. Tang, C. Zhang, S. Govindan, B. Urgaonkar, and R. N. Chang. Vpath:
Precise discovery of request processing paths from black-box observations of
thread and network activities. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on USENIX
Annual Technical Conference, USENIX’09, page 19, USA, 2009. USENIX Association.
[55] tcpdump. tcpdump: a powerful command-line packet analyzer.
[56] T. P. Team. What is an API endpoint? https://blog.postman.com/what-is-an-
api-endpoint/, 2023.
[57] G. Tene.
Wrk2: a HTTP benchmarking tool based mostly on wrk.
https://github.com/giltene/wrk2, 2019.
[58] Wikipedia. Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Bayesian_information_criterion.
[59] Wikipedia.
Central Limit Theorem.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Central_limit_theorem.
[60] Wikipedia.
Water filling algorithm.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Water_filling_algorithm.
[61] Wireshark. Wireshark: The world’s most popular network protocol analyzer.
[62] G. Zhou and M. Maas. Learning on distributed traces for data center storage
systems. In 4th Conference on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys 2021), 2021.
[63] Zipkin. Zipkin. https://zipkin.io/.
A
APPENDICES
Appendices are supporting material that has not been peer-reviewed.
A.1
Sample application topologies
Figure 7 illustrates the Hotel Reservation app consisting of 6 services,
excluding a varying count of MongoDB and Memcached instances.
840



--- PAGE 15 ---
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Sachin Ashok, et al.
Search
Reserve
Profile
Rate
Geo
Frontend
1
8
10
11
12
9
7
2
3
4
5
6
client
Figure 7: The Hotel Reservation application from the
DeathStarBench suite [28].
Figure 8 illustrates the Media Microservices consisting of 14 ser-
vices, excluding a varying count of MongoDB and Memcached in-
stances. The invocation order of the spans is not shown for the sake
of brevity.
nginx
userInfo
movieInfo
userReview
movieReview
ReviewStorage
composeReview
page
uniqueID
text
movieID
rating
plot
castInfo
client
http
Figure 8: The Media Microservices application from the
DeathStarBench suite [28].
A.2
Proof for the perfect cuts-based batching
algorithm.
We provide a correctness proof for the algorithm that we use to iden-
tify batch boundaries based off “perfect cuts”, where a perfect cut
corresponds to creating a batch boundary where a pair of spans on ei-
ther side of the boundary do not share a common candidate mapping.
First, we define some terms to set the stage for proving the result.
(1) Let a span A be represented by a pair of start and end times,
where start ≤end, which we call its time window𝑇(𝐴).
(2) Let there be a list of such spans sorted by start time with ties
broken by end time.
(3) Let a candidate for a span 𝑖consist of a set of child spans that
satisfy constraints (as discussed in §4.1). By definition, the
child spans must have start time ≥start time of span i and
end time ≤end time of span i.
(4) Let 𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖) represent a boundary in a list of spans such
that a 𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖) creates a past set of spans with indices in
the range [0,𝑖) and a future set of spans with indices in range
[𝑖,𝐾), where 𝐾is the size of the list. A 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖)
hence implies that the past and future set of spans do not
share any common candidate mappings.
(5) Let 𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑋,𝑌) represent a pair of spans with index 𝑋and
𝑌respectively and𝑇(𝑋,𝑌) represent the intersection of the
𝑇(𝑋) and𝑇(𝑌).
(6) Let index 𝑗𝑖represent a span with the latest end time among
all spans with index <𝑖.
For𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖), consider the following two statements–
(1) S1:𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑗𝑖,𝑖) do not share a candidate and span 𝑗𝑖ends before
span 𝑖.
(2) S2: There exists a 𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑥,𝑦) sharing a candidate, where x
and y are indices of spans before and after the 𝑐𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖)
respectively so that 𝑥≤𝑖−1 and𝑦≥𝑖.
Theorem A.1. S1 →not S2. That is, if for a certain 𝑖, span 𝑖and
span 𝑗𝑖do not share a candidate and span 𝑗𝑖ends before span 𝑖, then
any span after 𝑖, including 𝑖, does not share a candidate with any span
before 𝑖.
Proof. Proof by Contradiction:
If𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑥,𝑦) share a candidate, the candidate must exist in a𝑇(𝑥,𝑦)
which is not a subset of𝑇(𝑗𝑖,𝑖) (as otherwise 𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑗𝑖,𝑖) would then
trivially also share the same candidate).
However, this cannot be true for the following reasons:
(1) The earliest 𝑇(𝑥,𝑦) can begin is at the start of span i, given
that span i is the first span after the𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖). Hence,𝑇(𝑥,𝑦)
can, at the earliest, only begin at the start time of span i.
(2) The latest𝑇(𝑥,𝑦) can end is at the latest end time of any span
before the𝐶𝑢𝑡(𝑖−1,𝑖), which is at the end of span 𝑗𝑖by defini-
tion and is included in𝑇(𝑗𝑖,𝑖) since span 𝑗𝑖ends before span 𝑖.
(3) Therefore, any𝑇(𝑥,𝑦) has to be a subset of𝑇(𝑗𝑖,𝑖) which cre-
ates a contradiction as the candidate which is possible for
𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑥,𝑦) must also be possible for 𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑟(𝑗𝑖,𝑖)
Hence, if we can guarantee S1 to hold, S2 cannot be true.
□
A.3
Illustration of the various optimization steps.
Constructing Delay Distributions
Use mappings to
construct distribution
Joint 
optimization
Apply 
constraints
“Best guess” 
seed distribution
1a
2
4
1b
Rank 
Candidates
3
Figure 9: Constructing delay distributions (step 3) as described
in S4.1
841



--- PAGE 16 ---
TraceWeaver: Distributed Request Tracing for Microservices Without Application Modification
ACM SIGCOMM ’24, August 4–8, 2024, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Joint optimization
Candidate Mapping 1
Candidate Mapping 2
Candidate Mapping 3
Candidate Mapping 1
Candidate Mapping 2
Candidate Mapping 3
Candidate Mapping 1
Candidate Mapping 2
Candidate Mapping 3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
3
1
(ii) Transform candidate mappings into nodes
(iii) Add edges between nodes to add constraints.
Global Optimization
Across a batch of 3 requests in this example.
Score: X
Score: Y
Score: Z
Score: X
Score: Y
Score: Z
+
+
(iv) Identify the maximal independent 
set (the best scoring set of mappings).
(i) Find candidates satisfying constraints.
Score = Aggr. Score (X, Y, Z)
Figure 10: Joint optimization (step 5) as described in S4.1
Received 2 February 2024; revised 3 May 2024; accepted 14 June 2024
842
