

--- PAGE 1 ---
DESK: Distributed Observability Framework
for Edge-Based Containerized Microservices
Muhammad Usman∗, Simone Ferlin∗†, Anna Brunstrom∗, Javid Taheri∗
∗Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden
†Red Hat, Stockholm, Sweden
Email: ∗muhammad.usman@kau.se, ∗†sferlinr@redhat.com, ∗anna.brunstrom@kau.se, ∗javid.taheri@kau.se
Abstract—Modern information technology (IT) infrastructures
are becoming more complex to meet the diverse demands of
emerging technology paradigms such as 5G/6G networks, edge,
and internet of things (IoT). The intricacy of these infrastructures
grows further when hosting containerized workloads as mi-
croservices, resulting in the challenge to detect and troubleshoot
performance issues, incidents or even outages of critical use cases
like industrial automation processes. Thus, fine-grained measure-
ments and associated visualization are essential for operation
observability of these IT infrastructures. However, most existing
observability tools operate independently without systematically
covering the entire data workflow. This paper presents an in-
tegrated design for multi-stage observability workflows, denoted
as DistributEd obServability frameworK (DESK). The proposed
framework aims to improve observability workflows for measure-
ment, collection, fusion, storage, visualization, and notification. As
a proof of concept, we deployed the framework in a Kubernetes-
based testbed to demonstrate the successful integration of various
components and usability of collected observability data. We
also conducted a comprehensive study to determine the caused
overhead by DESK agents at the reasonably powerful edge node
hardware, which shows on average a CPU and memory overhead
of around 2.5% of total available hardware resource.
Index Terms—Edge Computing, Internet of Things (IoT),
Microservices, Monitoring, Observability, 5G/6G.
I. INTRODUCTION
With help of the 5th generation of mobile networks (5G),
the industry is entering the digitization era, where smart
and well-connected communication and processing chains are
demanding new requirements. As an example, realizing factory
automation, managing industrial processes and devices, neces-
sitates strict real-time requirements, including the 5G network
edge infrastructure itself. To date, this infrastructure is mainly
realized via lightweight containerization technologies (e.g.,
Docker) and managed by container orchestration platforms
(e.g., Kubernetes) to provide flexibility and scalability.
When industrial applications previously run on dedicated
hardware are transformed into a collection of containerized
microservices at the edge of a 5G network [1], meeting their
required real-time guarantees becomes very challenging. In
this context, fine-grained monitoring1 is a critical requirement
to understand performance degradation as well as detect inci-
dents such as service violations or even outages.
1Monitoring is a method of gaining visibility into different components of
a system to diagnose different types of operational anomalies [2].
Even though monitoring has served as a core function
of IT for the last few decades, it started to prove itself
incomplete due to various factors and practices including agile
development, cloud deployments, and DevOps. These factors
have changed how the entire IT environment (e.g., infras-
tructures, platforms, and applications) should be observed to
promptly respond to incidents. This transformation proved
itself powerful to be adopted by mobile networks such as 5G,
which is considered a critical infrastructure and, as such, it is
also expected to accommodate critical use case requirements.
To this end, observability is an emerging set of practices and
tools that goes beyond monitoring with the goal to show why a
system is not operative, thus providing insights of internal state
of a system by analyzing its external outputs [3]. The core idea
in observability is to quickly learn what is happening in the
system by quickly identifying the root cause of the problem.
Commonly, three main data types (logs, metrics, and traces)
are used by an observability system. Thus, a more future-
looking observability framework for real-time performance
observability of container-based edge services must capture
performance of the various infrastructure components as well
as the performance of the applications leveraging these three
data types, along with methods for correlating the symptoms
found in the collected data.
While there are extensive studies on monitoring [4]–[9],
a comprehensive observability framework that can facilitate
flexible processing and integration of observability data from
multiple parts of networks, IT infrastructure and applications
remains a gap. Thus, in this paper, we propose an integrated
design for a distributed observability workflow, denoted as
DistributEd obServability frameworK (DESK), by uniquely
integrating various observability-related open-source upstream
software. Specifically, we propose a practical framework de-
sign for an entire data processing workflow, from measurement
to visualization. Also, we investigate related open-source tools
and platforms that are employed in the software implementa-
tion of DESK. Furthermore, we perform verification of the
framework’s prototype implementation in a locally configured
small testbed.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
briefly discusses related works. Section III presents the design
and implementation details of DESK, followed by verification
results and some discussion in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes the paper.
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
979-8-3503-1102-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
617
2023 Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit) | 979-8-3503-1102-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/EUCNC/6GSUMMIT58263.2023.10188344
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 2 ---
Fig. 1: A detailed architecture of DESK for collecting, processing, and analyzing observability data from multiple sources.
II. RELATED WORK
There are numerous studies on monitoring that partly cover
observability-level details. Authors in [4] proposed a frame-
work for coordinating monitoring agents and their back-ends
to allow monitoring workflows at edge nodes for gathering
system-level performance metrics. [10] proposed a unified
monitoring framework for prompt identification of operational
faults in distributed clouds. [6] proposed a bottom-up NFV
analysis platform to systematically profile and classify Virtual
Network Functions (VNFs) considering different requirements.
[7] proposed an eBPF-based microservices collection scheme
that delivers diverse system metrics for single tenant environ-
ment. [11] discussed techniques to improve the observability of
distributed applications by combining multiple data sources to
provide a comprehensive view of the application’s operation
with the aim of better decision-making in the orchestration
process. From open-source community, OpenTelemetry [12]
is a project for collecting observability data from cloud-native
applications and their infrastructure to observe overall health
and performance. This project aims to standardize the genera-
tion and collection of telemetry data in distributed systems.
Aside from academic works and open-source observability
solutions, several proprietary solutions are also available in
[9]. In summary, although there are existing works in this
domain, we note a gap in the literature around an observability
solution that can enable low overhead measurements and
flexible processing of them to aid in the smooth operation
of edge-based containerized microservices.
III. DESK: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
We are designing DESK to deal with metrics, logs, and
traces together with fine-grained visualization support to assist
a diverse group of operators (e.g., infrastructure, platform,
and application) in efficiently managing and controlling an
edge-based system. More precisely, it targets to support end-
to-end runtime performance observability with infrastructure,
platform, and containerized microservices for IoT applications
in the Kubernetes-orchestrated edge cluster. As depicted in
Fig. 1, DESK consists of six main stages. These stages
are made of smaller, more manageable components in or-
der to provide loosely coupled data workflows. To isolate
these components from impacting actual workloads, they are
deployed separately using two dedicated namespaces (i.e.,
tenants) with limited resource allocations. One namespace is
termed as measurement and it contains the measurement stage
components. Other namespace is termed as observability, and
it contains all the other components of DESK. The framework
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
618
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 3 ---
implementation is kept open-source and available at GitHub2.
Next, we describe the main stages of DESK.
1) Measurement Stage: Fine-grained metrics from hetero-
geneous measurement points (MPs) are essential to permit
real-time observability tools to work with a large variety of
data during analysis. Nevertheless, selecting the appropriate
metrics and measurement intervals for obtaining operation
observability is challenging. Generally, it is determined based
on factors such as the number of active users, the periodicity
of edge node aliveness shifts, and the impact of edge node
failures on the running applications [13]. Considering these
requirements, DESK employs Telegraf, Promtail, and Jaeger
agents due to their lightweight nature and data enrichment
features. To acquire metrics, we employ Telegraf agent. Logs
data is acquired using Promtail agent. For traces acquisition,
Jaeger agent is selected. Although DESK does not prioritize
agents for other sources, such as underlying mobile networks,
it does support observability data ingestion from such sources
in a push mode. Furthermore, automated deployment of these
agents on newly added edge nodes and their persistent exe-
cution are ensured using the Kubernetes Daemonset object,
which guarantees one running agent per node.
2) Delivery Stage: For data delivery and collection, reli-
able data transfer into a central location is required, where
majority of the services are running. In fact, moving data
among different services has several steps such as copying
and integrating data with other data sources. Therefore, a data
pipeline integrates all of these steps to ensure consistency.
Since a Kubernetes-based edge cluster consists of multiple
worker nodes, a fault-tolerant collection and aggregation of
data in near real-time from distributed edge nodes to produce
centralized operational data feeds is a critical requirement.
For reliable data transfer from edge nodes to centralized
location, the DESK data pipeline uses Apache Kafka, which
is considered an industry standard with high-performance and
reliability. It provides a well-defined set of APIs for various
language platforms, and the DESK implementation leverages
JAVA-based APIs.
3) Fusion Stage: Data fusion in the context of DESK is the
process of observing incoming data to draw conclusions about
the overall systems and applications’ performance, primarily
with the assistance of reliable data cleaning and efficient
data analysis systems. The data under observation could be
historical or real-time, depending on the requirements of
the troubleshooting or diagnostics procedures. Most of the
effort required, especially for these analytics and optimization
procedures, is spent on preparing and integrating data to
produce accurate results. Since this stage is highly dependent
on an application use case; therefore, we have not yet focused
heavily on implementing the components of this stage.
4) Storage Stage: To deliver a data-centric framework, flex-
ible storage and fast data access are two critical factors. Data
storage is a challenging operation because of numerous data
types and formats (e.g., metrics, logs, traces). Since DESK is
2https://github.com/smartx-usman/distributed-observability-framework.git
a data-centric framework, it carefully weighs data storage by
delivering elastic storage for manageable maintenance (i.e.,
via proper data organization for long-term and short-term
storage), as well as for performance and scalability (i.e., via
careful data split into various datastores for metrics, logs,
and traces). DESK applies Prometheus for data storage of
metrics. For logs, the framework employs Loki [14], which
is a horizontally scalable, multi-tenant log aggregation system
motivated by Prometheus. Furthermore, Elasticsearch is used
for traces storage and long-term storage of the data.
5) Visualization and Notification Stage: Visualization is a
critical tool for the operators who need to take immediate
recovery actions after viewing data in real-time. In particular,
it helps detecting patterns visually and taking measures against
undesirable operational behaviors. DESK applies Grafana
open-source software for creating visualizations and dash-
boards. Grafana natively supports over thirty data sources,
including Loki, Prometheus, and Elasticsearch, which are the
backend datastores of DESK.
Alerting is a reactive component of the framework that
initiates actions when metric values change. DESK includes
anomaly detection-based alerting and heartbeat alerts in ad-
dition to threshold-based alerts. It transmits alerts to the
Prometheus AlertManager, which handles them through a
pipeline of silencing, inhibition, grouping, and email notifi-
cation or quicker actions for simplified operational issues via
P&O stage automated (re-)configuration components.
6) Provisioning and Orchestration (P&O) Stage: DESK
P&O services are divided into two main categories. First,
deployment services are responsible for installing and run-
ning a specific number of DESK components/services on the
edge nodes. DESK itself is a fully-containerized service and
fully-manageable with Kubernetes-native features. Mainly, we
utilized Helm [15] for installing required framework services
in a scalable manner using JSON-based configuration files.
Second, (re-)configuration services are in charge of taking over
generated actions, and invoking deployed microservices and
system re-configurations when necessary using Kubectl tool.
IV. DESK: VERIFICATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This Section presents DESK’s experimental verification
results. A thorough investigation is carried out in Section
IV-B1 using verification setup, as described in Section IV-A,
to determine how much overhead observability measurements
incur. Also, an analysis of how collected measurements can
help different user groups to observe system performance
using temporal data is provided in Section IV-B2.
A. Experimentation Environment
An edge infrastructure can be build using different resource
specifications. For instance, an enterprise can set up few
powerful servers or several Raspberry Pis according to the
the business use case demands. Our testbed configuration
took an intermediate approach, where desktop-based hardware
with average specifications are employed. These hardware are
setup as a small cluster and it is driven by Kubernetes for
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
619
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 4 ---
DESK deployment and analysis. This testbed setup includes
one master node and three worker nodes. All these nodes have
an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6700 CPU running at 3.40GHz, 16
GB of DDR4 memory, 256 GB of disk space, a 1 Gbit/s
network interface, Ubuntu 22.04 operating system (OS), and
the Kubernetes software version 1.26.0 installed. Furthermore,
we did not investigate the impact of edge node’s geographical
placement and inter-connectivity issues during these experi-
ments; rather, we assumed that all edge nodes are dependable
and stably inter-connected.
ThingsBoard3 is an open-source edge IoT platform; we
deployed it for application data processing and load gener-
ation in our testbed. Other than ThingsBoard microservices,
a custom-developed IoT data generation application is also
deployed in the testbed as a set of pods (i.e., deployment) to
simulate a continuous stream of sensor data. This application
generates each message with four data points, and transports
the simulated data to the ThingsBoard.
B. Experimentation Results
1) Measurements Overhead Results: An observability mea-
surement agent introduces a certain overhead, because it uses
the system resources (e.g., CPU) for performing its tasks.
These measurement agents can be a source of contention,
particularly in constrained edge-based infrastructures where
hundreds of performance counters are collected and stored.
Because DESK aims to gather various types of data, it is crit-
ical to ensure it does not generate excessive overhead. Hence,
the impact of agent overhead is thoroughly investigated.
DESK supports metrics collection, and the overhead caused
by these measurements is depicted in Fig. 2a. Using eight input
plugins, a total of 88 metrics are first gathered by Telegraf and
then sent via output plugin for further processing. To observe
metrics overhead, various configurations, such as measurement
intervals between 250ms and 10s, are tested.
An identical memory usage is recorded throughout all these
varying intervals, and it remained consistent at around 50 MiB.
However, the memory overhead touched 62 MiB for the master
node case of 10s (please note, lower than 10s intervals were
not successful on this node because this agent was configured
with an upper resource constraint of 80 MiB). This difference
is due to nine input plugins on the master node as opposed
to eight input plugins on the worker nodes. The additional
input plugin on the master node generated Kubernetes resource
metrics that necessitated more resources to process due to
their high cardinality. Thus, we recommend a less aggressive
measurement interval for these metrics on the master node
(e.g., 10s), because a more aggressive interval will only cause
errors and higher overhead. Compared to memory usage, a
more significant difference is noted in CPU usage when we
reduced the measurement interval from 250ms to 10s. Please
note that Kubernetes default monitoring interval is set to 10s;
whereas, we consider a measurement interval of 1s as a better
choice for time-sensitive applications. A lower measurement
3https://thingsboard.io/
(a) Metrics measurements overhead.
(b) Logs measurements overhead.
(c) Traces measurements overhead.
Fig. 2: Observability data measurement and collection over-
head incurred by DESK deployment on edge nodes.
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
620
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 5 ---
interval will allow faster detection, and this will ultimately
allow Kubernetes to schedule/restart a new container without
waiting for 10s period. Furthermore, DESK allows to specify
a different measurement interval for each group of metrics.
For example, the measurement interval for CPU consumption
metrics can be set to 1s, whereas the measurement interval for
Kubernetes resource metrics can be set to 10s.
DESK supports logs collection, and the overhead caused by
logging agent is depicted in Fig. 2b. These experiments were
performed with a varying numbers of pods. At Google Cloud
Engine, 100 are the maximum number of recommended pods
per worker node4 while Kubernetes official documentation
recommends a maximum of 110 pods per worker node5;
therefore, we experimented with a maximum of 110 pods. The
logs measurement and metadata tags augmentation overhead
went up to 70 MiB for 110 pods on one of the worker nodes.
Compared to memory overhead, CPU overhead varied more
and reached 90ms for 50 pods and 130ms for 110 pods.
DESK supports trace collection, and the overhead caused
by these trace measurements is presented in Fig. 2c. For
trace generation, we instrumented a Python application with
OpenTelemetry tracing SDKs and APIs. The generated traces
are then sent from this Python application to the Jaeger agent
that was deployed on each worker node and load-balanced
with the help of a Kubernetes service object. Simulated sensor
data from 50, 80, and 110 pods were continuously sent to
the ThingsBoard platform and then processed by our Python
application, which generated traces.
For traces, memory overhead remained around 6.5 MiB with
50 pods and increased to 10 MiB with 110 pods. Observ-
ability1 worker node behaved slightly differently than other
worker nodes, possibly due to internal resource rescheduling
by Kubernetes. For 110 pods, CPU resource overhead reached
up to 1.3ms. To summarize, we find that the key consideration
with tracing-enabled applications is determining an appropri-
ate sampling strategy to ensure a sustainable and actionable
load for the tracing backend services.
2) Observability Data Usage Results: The real value of
collected metrics, logs, and traces can only be realized if
they can reveal any potential operational flaws, particularly
for different user groups. To conduct a usability study of
DESK, we generated a continuous stream of simulated sensor
data with the assumption that all the sensors generate the
same amount of data and data is sent to the ThingsBoard
for further processing. For each simulated sensor, we defined
three states (i.e., normal, abnormal, and mixed). In a normal
sensor state, valid data values are generated and transmitted at
regular intervals. When a sensor is in abnormal state, valid data
values are generated but transmitted irregularly. In a mixed
sensor state, both valid and invalid data values are generated
and transmitted irregularly. As shown in Fig. 3, the pods
processing data from the normal sensors generated almost 600
logs/min, whereas CPU usage was kept around 8ms. The pod
4https://learnk8s.io/kubernetes-node-size
5https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/cluster-large/
labeled as abnormal generated around 200 logs/min and had a
CPU usage of 2ms. These figures are significantly lower than
normal sensor pods and exhibit some irregularity. Mixed pod
generated 4500 logs/min and consumed nearly 45ms of CPU
time. These figures are significantly higher when compared
to normal sensor pods, indicating another abnormality. Thus,
from the platform operator’s perspective, without knowing any
application-specific details, an operational fault alarm can be
triggered for further troubleshooting, while the application
operator can investigate further based on the log contents.
Fig. 3: Logs and metrics analysis to detect any faulty pods.
When observing end-to-end application performance, in-
tegrated analysis and exploration of observability data is a
primary requirement. For this purpose, logs and traces inte-
grated analysis is conducted, and some results are shown in
Fig. 4. The same setup of ThingsBoard with a microservices-
based Python application is utilized during this experimen-
tation. To enable integration and exploration of traces from
the logs, a traceid is incorporated programmatically in logs
of particular interest. Then, using the Grafana visualization,
a regular expression is created to automatically establish a
navigable link to the trace for further exploration (e.g., spans).
For example, in the case presented in Fig. 4a, whenever the
application processing delay exceeds 20ms, an error log is
generated with the corresponding traceid, incorporated as a
tag. When application operators get the filtered observability
data in the form of visualization, they can select a specific log
to obtain detailed information from the trace as well as the
time spent by each microservice while processing the data.
If we look at Fig. 4b, the main reason for a delay greater
than 20ms is caused by the temp-analyzer-proc-store service,
which is in charge of storing data in a MySQL database. Based
on this information, different operations teams (e.g., platform
operators) can perform additional troubleshooting to resolve
storage delay issues.
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
621
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



--- PAGE 6 ---
(a) Logs filtering and visualization.
(b) Traces filtering and visualization.
Fig. 4: Logs and traces integrated analysis using visualizations to detect any operational faults.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented the DESK architecture and
experimental results. Compared to previous works, DESK’s
main advantage is its loosely coupled integrated design, which
provides flexibility when processing various types of observ-
ability data, allowing operators to troubleshoot and resolve
complex operational issues quickly. Specifically, DESK of-
fers an integrated design of an observability workflow for
edge-based containerized microservices, and its operation has
been thoroughly verified in terms of measurements processing
overheads. For our future work, we aim to further develop
and integrate various components in DESK, including the
validation with other use cases. More precisely, DESK requires
rigorous testing in a dedicated testbed, which is designed to
run high-volume 5G applications at the edge, to verify that all
components are operational in high workload scenarios, and
it aids in improving the operations of the environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Knowledge Foundation
of Sweden (KKS) through the Synergy Project AIDA - A
Holistic AI-driven Networking and Processing Framework for
Industrial IoT (Rek:20200067).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Baˇskarada, V. Nguyen, and A. Koronios, “Architecting Microservices:
Practical Opportunities and Challenges,” J. Comput. Inf. Syst., vol. 60,
no. 5, pp. 428–436, Sep. 2020, publisher: Taylor & Francis.
[2] O. Korableva, O. Kalimullina, and E. Kurbanova, “Building the Moni-
toring Systems for Complex Distributed Systems: Problems and Solu-
tions:,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. on Enterprise Inf. Syst., Porto, Portugal,
2017, pp. 221–228.
[3] M. Usman, S. Ferlin, A. Brunstrom, and J. Taheri, “A Survey on
Observability of Distributed Edge & Container-Based Microservices,”
IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 86 904–86 919, 2022.
[4] A. Brand´on, M. S. P´erez, J. Montes, and A. Sanchez, “FMonE: A
Flexible Monitoring Solution at the Edge,” Wirel Commun Mob Comput,
vol. 2018, p. e2068278, Nov. 2018, publisher: Hindawi.
[5] M. Usman and J. Kim, “SmartX Multi-View Visibility Framework for
unified monitoring of SDN-enabled multisite clouds,” Trans Emerging
Tel Tech, vol. 33, no. 8, p. e3819, 2022.
[6] M. Gokan Khan, S. Bastani, J. Taheri, A. Kassler, and S. Deng,
“NFV-Inspector: A Systematic Approach to Profile and Analyze Virtual
Network Functions,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. on Cloud Netw.
(CloudNet), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[7] J. Levin and T. A. Benson, “ViperProbe: Rethinking Microservice
Observability with eBPF,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. on Cloud Netw.
(CloudNet), Nov. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[8] C. Lai, J. Kimball, T. Zhu, Q. Wang, and C. Pu, “milliScope: A Fine-
Grained Monitoring Framework for Performance Debugging of n-Tier
Web Services,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. on Distrib. Comput. Syst.
(ICDCS), Jun. 2017, pp. 92–102.
[9] A. Thurai, “GigaOm Radar for Cloud Observability,” Feb. 2021,
last Modified: 2021-10-27 Publisher: Gigaom. [Online]. Available:
https://gigaom.com/report/gigaom-radar-for-cloud-observability/
[10] M. A. Rathore, M. Usman, and J. Kim, “Maintaining SmartX multi-
view visibility for OF@TEIN+ distributed cloud-native edge boxes,”
Trans Emerging Tel Tech, vol. 32, no. 6, p. e4101, 2021.
[11] I. Tzanettis, C.-M. Androna, A. Zafeiropoulos, E. Fotopoulou, and
S. Papavassiliou, “Data Fusion of Observability Signals for Assisting
Orchestration of Distributed Applications,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 5, p.
2061, Jan. 2022.
[12] “OpenTelemetry:
Documentation.”
[Online].
Available:
https:
//opentelemetry.io/docs/
[13] M. Usman, A. C. Risdianto, J. Han, and J. Kim, “Interactive Visualiza-
tion of SDN-Enabled Multisite Cloud Playgrounds Leveraging SmartX
MultiView Visibility Framework,” Comput. J., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 838–
854, Jun. 2019.
[14] E. Bautista, N. Sukhija, and S. Deng, “Shasta Log Aggregation, Mon-
itoring and Alerting in HPC Environments with Grafana Loki and
ServiceNow,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Cluster Comput. (CLUSTER),
Sep. 2022, pp. 602–610.
[15] S. Gokhale, R. Poosarla, S. Tikar, S. Gunjawate, A. Hajare, S. Desh-
pande, S. Gupta, and K. Karve, “Creating Helm Charts to ease deploy-
ment of Enterprise Application and its related Services in Kubernetes,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. on Comput., Commun. and Green Eng. (CCGE), Sep.
2021, pp. 1–5.
2023 European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit): Applications, IoT, Use cases (AIU)
622
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: Instituto Politecnico do Porto. Downloaded on January 05,2026 at 22:27:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
